FOR PUBLICATION

      UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
           FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

AIRDOCTOR, LLC, a Delaware                         No. 24-215
Limited Liability Company,
                                                    D.C. No.
                                                 2:22-cv-05784-
                Plaintiff - Appellant,
                                                    GW-AS
    v.                                              OPINION

XIAMEN QICHUANG TRADE
CO., LTD.,

                Defendant - Appellee.

          Appeal from the United States District Court
              for the Central District of California
         George H. Wu, Senior District Judge, Presiding

           Argued and Submitted November 22, 2024
                     San Jose, California

                       Filed April 11, 2025

      Before: Marsha S. Berzon and Michelle T. Friedland,
    Circuit Judges, and Matthew F. Kennelly, District Judge. *


*
  The Honorable Matthew F. Kennelly, United States District Judge for
the Northern District of Illinois, sitting by designation.
2     AIRDOCTOR, LLC V. XIAMEN QICHUANG TRADE CO. LTD.


                    Per Curiam Opinion;
                 Concurrence by Judge Berzon


                          SUMMARY **


                       Default Judgment

    Reversing and remanding for further proceedings in an
action under the Lanham Act, the panel held that the district
court erred in entering default judgment under Fed. R. Civ.
P. 54(c) but denying the plaintiff’s request for damages.
    Rule 54(c) provides that a default judgment “must not
differ in kind from, or exceed in amount, what is demanded
in the pleadings.” The district court denied the plaintiff’s
request for damages because the complaint did not identify
an amount of damages sought.
     Guided by Henry v. Sneiders, 490 F.2d 315 (9th Cir.
1974) (holding that a default judgment of $235,338.89 was
permissible under Rule 54(c) where the complaint had
alleged that the plaintiff had suffered $71,243.68 in direct
losses, “together with additional amounts not yet fully
determined”), and agreeing with the Seventh Circuit, the
panel held that Rule 54(c) does not prohibit awarding actual
damages in a default judgment to a party that sought in its
pleadings actual damages in an amount to be determined at
trial.



**
  This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
      AIRDOCTOR, LLC V. XIAMEN QICHUANG TRADE CO. LTD.        3


    Concurring, Judge Berzon, joined by Judge Kennelly,
wrote that Henry was not only dispositive but also correctly
decided because neither the language of Rule 54(c) nor
practical considerations regarding the ability of defaulting
defendants to oppose a default judgment for damages
support preclusion of a default damages award where the
complaint did not plead a numerical damages amount.



                         COUNSEL

Ashly E. Sands (argued), Epstein Drangel LLP, New York,
New York; Peter J. Farnese, Farnese PC, Los Angeles,
California; for Plaintiff-Appellant.



                          OPINION

PER CURIAM:

     In rendering a final judgment, a district court typically
“should grant the relief to which each party is entitled, even
if the party has not demanded that relief in its pleadings.”
Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(c). But when a final judgment is entered
because a party to the litigation defaults, the district court’s
ability to grant relief is more limited. Federal Rule of Civil
Procedure 54(c) provides that a default judgment “must not
differ in kind from, or exceed in amount, what is demanded
in the pleadings.”
    In this case, Plaintiff filed a Complaint seeking, among
other forms of relief, actual damages in an amount to be
determined at trial. No trial took place, though, because
4     AIRDOCTOR, LLC V. XIAMEN QICHUANG TRADE CO. LTD.


Defendant failed to appear in the litigation. Plaintiff moved
for default judgment, seeking injunctive relief and more than
$2 million in actual damages. The district court entered
default judgment in Plaintiff’s favor but denied Plaintiff’s
request for damages. The court reasoned that, under Rule
54(c), any award of damages would “exceed . . . what is
demanded in the pleadings” because the Complaint had not
identified an amount of damages sought.
    We now hold that Rule 54(c) does not prohibit awarding
actual damages in a default judgment to a party that sought
in its pleadings actual damages in an amount to be
determined at trial. We accordingly reverse and remand for
further proceedings.
                               I.
    Plaintiff AirDoctor, LLC, sells air purifiers and
replacement air filters. Defendant Xiamen Qichuang Trade
Co., Ltd., also sells replacement air filters, primarily via
Amazon.com. Plaintiff alleged that Defendant falsely
advertised that its air filters were compatible with Plaintiff’s
air purifiers and offered equivalent filtration, thereby
diverting sales from Plaintiff’s more effective air filters and
harming Plaintiff’s reputation. Plaintiff filed a Complaint
alleging violations of the Lanham Act, California’s Unfair
Competition Law, and California’s False Advertising Law.
Plaintiff sought in the Complaint, among other forms of
relief, “actual, compensatory, consequential, statutory,
special, and/or punitive damages in an amount to be proven
at trial,” attorney’s fees and costs, and an injunction to
restrain Defendant from further false-advertising violations.
   Plaintiff served the Complaint, but Defendant failed to
appear or otherwise file a responsive pleading. Plaintiff then
moved for default judgment and requested entry of a
      AIRDOCTOR, LLC V. XIAMEN QICHUANG TRADE CO. LTD.             5


permanent injunction, actual damages of approximately $2.5
million under 15 U.S.C. § 1117(a) of the Lanham Act, and
attorney’s fees of approximately $50,000. Because Plaintiff
lacked discovery from Defendant, Plaintiff calculated the
proposed actual-damages amount using a third-party
research tool to approximate the quantity of sales that
Defendant made through Amazon.com. Plaintiff calculated
the attorney’s fees using a formula based on the amount of
proposed damages, as instructed by the district court’s local
rules.
     The district court granted Plaintiff’s motion for default
judgment and enjoined Defendant from advertising that its
air filters offered equivalent filtration to Plaintiff’s air filters.
But the district court denied Plaintiff’s request for actual
damages, reasoning that awarding Plaintiff any damages
would “exceed in amount[] what is demanded in the
pleadings” in violation of Rule 54(c) because the Complaint
had not quantified the damages sought. Fed. R. Civ. P.
54(c). The district court also denied attorney’s fees,
reasoning that under the formula in its local rules, if no
damages are awarded, no fees should be awarded either.
    Plaintiff timely appealed the order denying damages and
attorney’s fees. Defendant has not appeared on appeal.
                                II.
                                 A.
   We review de novo a district court’s interpretation of the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. KST Data, Inc. v. DXC
Tech. Co., 980 F.3d 709, 713 (9th Cir. 2020).
6     AIRDOCTOR, LLC V. XIAMEN QICHUANG TRADE CO. LTD.


                                  B.
    Rule 54(c) states that, unlike other final judgments, “[a]
default judgment must not differ in kind from, or exceed in
amount, what is demanded in the pleadings.” 1 Our court has
interpreted Rule 54(c) to prohibit awarding a party a
category of damages that the party had not identified in its
pleadings. For example, in Fong v. United States, 300 F.2d
400 (9th Cir. 1962), we affirmed the district court’s denial of
actual damages in a default judgment because the plaintiff
had sought only liquidated damages in the complaint. Id. at
412–14; see also In re Ferrell, 539 F.3d 1186, 1192–93 (9th
Cir. 2008) (holding that a plaintiff may not recover costs and
fees in a default judgment under a statute different from that
identified in the complaint).
    Here, however, Plaintiff’s request for actual damages in
its motion for default judgment is consistent with its request
for actual damages in the Complaint. A default judgment’s
award of such damages would not, then, “differ in kind
from . . . what is demanded in the pleadings.” Fed. R. Civ.
P. 54(c) (emphasis added). Still, we must consider whether
awarding Plaintiff any damages would “exceed in amount[]

1
  The default judgment provision in Rule 54(c) was amended in 2007 to
the language before us today. Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(c), 550 U.S. 1003, 1115
(2007), https://perma.cc/MN8D-DX2Z. Prior to 2007, Rule 54(c) stated
in near-identical language that “[a] judgment by default shall not be
different in kind from or exceed in amount that prayed for in the demand
for judgment.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(c), 308 U.S. 647, 732 (1939) (amended
2007), https://perma.cc/6HU2-RCFP. Because the 2007 amendments
made only stylistic changes to Rule 54(c), we follow precedent
considering the former version of Rule 54(c) as if it considered the
current version. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(c) advisory committee’s note to
2007 amendment (“The language of Rule 54 has been amended as part
of the general restyling of the Civil Rules . . . . Th[o]se changes are
intended to be stylistic only.”).
      AIRDOCTOR, LLC V. XIAMEN QICHUANG TRADE CO. LTD.       7


what is demanded in the pleadings” in violation of Rule
54(c) because the Complaint did not request a specific
amount of damages.
     In answering that question, we are guided by our opinion
in Henry v. Sneiders, 490 F.2d 315 (9th Cir. 1974). In that
case, the complaint alleged that the plaintiff had suffered
$71,243.68 in direct losses, “together with additional
amounts not yet fully determined,” such as for “legal
expenses and attorneys’ fees, embarrassment, anxiety, and
loss of health.” Id. at 317 n.2. After the defendant failed to
obey discovery orders, the district court awarded the plaintiff
$235,338.89 in a default judgment. Id. at 316, 317. The
defendant then appealed, arguing that Rule 54(c) prohibited
the district court from awarding damages in a default
judgment exceeding the amount pleaded in the complaint.
Id. We rejected the defendant’s argument. We held that “the
default judgment did not exceed the amount prayed for”
because the amount prayed for “was not limited to
$71,243.68.” Id. at 317. Rather, the plaintiff prayed for
$71,243.68 in direct losses, and for “additional damages for
breach of contract, the amount of which was to be proved at
trial.” Id.
     Henry instructs that Rule 54(c) presents no bar to
awarding actual damages in a default judgment where the
complaint sought those damages in an amount to be proven
at trial. Specifically, in Henry, we allowed the complaint’s
request for “additional damages for breach of contract, the
amount of which was to be proved at trial” to support an
award of $164,095.21 in breach of contract damages—i.e.,
the amount by which the total $235,338.89 default judgment
exceeded the $71,243.68 of damages for direct losses
pleaded in the complaint. Because the Complaint here
similarly sought actual damages in an amount to be proven
8      AIRDOCTOR, LLC V. XIAMEN QICHUANG TRADE CO. LTD.


at trial, under Henry, Rule 54(c) does not prevent Plaintiff
from obtaining actual damages in the default judgment. 2
    To the extent that we could distinguish Henry on the
ground that the Complaint here, unlike the one in Henry, did
not quantify any amount of damages whatsoever, we decline
to draw such a distinction. “[A]bsent a strong reason to do
so, we will not create a direct conflict with other circuits.”
United States v. Cuevas-Lopez, 934 F.3d 1056, 1067 (9th
Cir. 2019) (alteration in original) (quoting United States v.
Chavez-Vernaza, 844 F.2d 1368, 1374 (9th Cir. 1987)). The
Seventh Circuit has held that Rule 54(c) does not bar a
district court from awarding damages in a default judgment
where a party’s pleadings did not quantify the amount of
damages sought. See Appleton Elec. Co. v. Graves Truck
Line, Inc., 635 F.2d 603, 610–12 (7th Cir. 1980) (noting that
the plaintiff’s complaint requested damages in an “unstated
amount[,]” so it contained no “damage ceilings”). There is
no “strong reason” to depart from the rule that follows from
Henry and thereby to conflict with the Seventh Circuit.
Cuevas-Lopez, 934 F.3d at 1067 (quoting Chavez-Vernaza,
844 F.2d at 1374). We accordingly decline to distinguish
Henry.



2
  In a tentative ruling on Plaintiff’s motion for default judgment, the
district court expressed concern about the accuracy of Plaintiff’s
proposed actual damages figure. The final judgment, however, denied
the award of damages and attorney’s fees solely under Rule 54(c), and
Plaintiff does not argue the accuracy of its proposed damages calculation
on appeal. Our holding is therefore limited to the interpretation of Rule
54(c), and we have no occasion to consider whether Plaintiff has satisfied
its burden to prove up the requested damages amount. We likewise have
no occasion to consider the amount, if any, of attorney’s fees that might
eventually be awarded on remand.
     AIRDOCTOR, LLC V. XIAMEN QICHUANG TRADE CO. LTD.       9


                             III.
   For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the denial of the
award of damages and remand for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.


BERZON, Circuit Judge, with whom KENNELLY, District
Judge, joins, concurring:

    I fully join the per curiam opinion. I write separately to
explain why Henry v. Sneiders, 490 F.2d 315 (9th Cir. 1974),
is not only dispositive of the issue before us but was
correctly decided.
    The district court’s premise in denying damages in this
case was that the language of Rule 54(c) requires barring
damages after a default where the complaint did not plead a
numerical damages amount. That premise is incorrect, for
several reasons.
    First, the Rule requires that “[a] default judgment must
not differ in kind from, or exceed in amount, what is
demanded in the pleadings.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(c). Omitting
a numerical damages demand but requesting an amount to
be determined by the trier of fact is not equivalent to
demanding zero dollars, or any other amount, in damages. A
request for a damages award based on evidence submitted to
and reviewed by the trial judge cannot “exceed in amount[]
what is demanded in the pleadings,” as no specific amount
is demanded. Id.
    Second, absent from Rule 54(c)—or any other provision
in the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure—is a requirement
that a plaintiff plead a specific amount of damages. Pleading
for an unspecified, appropriate amount, as found by a judge
10    AIRDOCTOR, LLC V. XIAMEN QICHUANG TRADE CO. LTD.


or jury, is exceedingly common, as evidenced by the fact that
Rule 26 requires disclosure of a damage estimate in the
initial disclosures. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(a)(1)(A)(iii). This
damage computation is due within 14 days of the parties’
Rule 26(f) conference, not earlier. Given this provision, no
inference of any particular “amount . . . demanded”—zero or
anything else—can be drawn from the absence of a specific
amount in the complaint; a default judgment cannot “exceed
in amount[] what is demanded in the pleadings” when the
pleadings do not demand any specific amount but,
appropriately, leave that calculation for later. Fed. R. Civ. P.
54(c). Rather, Rule 54(c) requires only that if a plaintiff does
plead a specific damage estimate, the award on default
judgment may not exceed that amount.
    Third, as the per curiam opinion recognizes, Henry v.
Sneiders compels this interpretation. 490 F.2d 315 (9th Cir.
1974). In Henry, the plaintiff pleaded a “direct loss” of
$71,243.68 as well as “additional amounts not yet fully
determined” for, among other things, “appraisal examination
costs” and the “loss of the value of the [product] as
represented.” Id. at 317 n.2. We affirmed the district court’s
award of $235,338.89 on default judgment, explaining that
“[t]he prayer was not limited to $71,243.68” because the
plaintiff had “prayed for additional damages . . . , the amount
of which was to be proved at trial.” Id. at 317. Accordingly,
“the default judgment did not exceed the amount prayed
for.” Id.
   The result in Henry could not have been reached if Rule
54(c) required pleading a specific amount for each type of
damages requested. That interpretation of the Rule would
have precluded any recovery for the non-enumerated
damages, limiting the plaintiff’s recovery to $71,243.68. The
application of Rule 54(c) in the present case is in fact more
     AIRDOCTOR, LLC V. XIAMEN QICHUANG TRADE CO. LTD.      11


straightforward than in Henry. As no specific amount of
damages was pleaded, there is no argument that Plaintiff
should be limited to a specific amount identified in its
pleadings. There is no logically coherent reading of Rule
54(c) that would permit the damages amount awarded in
Henry other than the one I posit—that the Rule limits
damages in a default judgment only where a specific total
damages amount is pleaded.
    Fourth, Fong v. United States, 300 F.2d 400 (9th Cir.
1962), is also consistent with our interpretation of Rule
54(c). There we held that a plaintiff could not recover actual
damages in a default judgment because it had pleaded only
liquidated damages related to the count on which it
recovered. Id. at 414. The award of actual damages in that
situation would violate Rule 54(c)’s prohibition on awarding
damages “different in kind” from those pleaded. Id. (quoting
Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(c)). But Fong said nothing about
precluding damages where no specific kind of damages was
pleaded, or about precluding damages of the same kind as
those pleaded because the pleading left the determination of
the amount of damages for trial.
    Fifth, notice-related concerns are not sufficient, even
assuming they could be, to overcome all of these
considerations and justify reading a pleading requirement as
to the amount of damages into the Rules. Once defendants
have been served with process, they are on notice that default
judgment could be entered against them if they fail to appear.
“No known authority supports [the] proposition that
defendants have a ‘right’ to default and to know the exact
measure of liability that will flow from a prospective
default.” Appleton Elec. Co. v. Graves Truck Line, Inc., 635
F.2d 603, 611 (7th Cir. 1980). That is especially true where,
as is the case here, the information about the amount of
12    AIRDOCTOR, LLC V. XIAMEN QICHUANG TRADE CO. LTD.


damages the plaintiff is entitled to is uniquely within the
defendant’s control.
    Further, it is far from clear that requiring a plaintiff to
amend their complaint to include an estimate of their
damages—as opposed to allowing them to submit a motion
for default judgment seeking a particular amount of
damages—would provide the defendant with additional
notice. Rule 5(a)(2) states that “[n]o service is required on a
party who is in default for failing to appear,” the only
exception being that “a pleading that asserts a new claim for
relief against such a party must be served on that party
under Rule 4.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 5(a)(2). In cases like this one,
a plaintiff’s amended pleading would add only a damages
estimate, not a new claim; a plaintiff adding only a damages
amount in an amended complaint would not be required to
serve the defendant with the amended complaint. There is
therefore no notice-related justification for requiring a
plaintiff to include a specific damage estimate in an amended
complaint.
                      *       *       *
    Given all this, where the defendant defaults, the
appropriate procedure is for the plaintiff to move for
judgment in a particular amount and provide an evidentiary
basis for the amount asserted. The court then must determine
the appropriate award based on this evidence. Notably, a
“[p]laintiff’s burden in ‘proving up’ damages is relatively
lenient” in the default judgment context. Philip Morris USA,
Inc. v. Castworld Prods., Inc., 219 F.R.D. 494, 498 (C.D.
Cal. 2003). As one district court noted, “courts have
accepted less precise estimates of damages where a
defendant frustrates the discovery of a precise amount by
     AIRDOCTOR, LLC V. XIAMEN QICHUANG TRADE CO. LTD.    13


defaulting in the action.” Wecosign, Inc. v. IFG Holdings,
Inc., 845 F. Supp. 2d 1072, 1084 (C.D. Cal. 2012).
    In sum, neither the language of Rule 54(c) nor the
practical considerations regarding the ability of defaulting
defendants to oppose a default judgment for damages
support preclusion of a default damages award here. Henry
is not only binding on us as to the propriety of the default
damages award but was correctly decided in that regard.