FOR PUBLICATION

     UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
          FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

ELLIOTT AMBROSIO; SIERRA                         No. 24-2708
TRENHOLM,
                                                  D.C. No.
                                               2:22-cv-00342-
              Plaintiffs - Appellants,
                                                    SMB
    v.

PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED                             OPINION
INSURANCE COMPANY;
PROGRESSIVE ADVANCED
INSURANCE COMPANY,

              Defendants - Appellees.

         Appeal from the United States District Court
                  for the District of Arizona
         Susan M. Brnovich, District Judge, Presiding

             Argued and Submitted April 4, 2025
                     Phoenix, Arizona

                   Filed September 12, 2025

Before: Michael Daly Hawkins, Evan J. Wallach, and Ryan
               D. Nelson, Circuit Judges.*

*
 The Honorable Evan J. Wallach, United States Circuit Judge for the
Federal Circuit, sitting by designation.
2          AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.


                  Opinion by Judge Hawkins;
                   Dissent by Judge Wallach


                          SUMMARY**


                       Class Certification

    The panel affirmed the district court’s order declining to
certify a proposed class in an action brought by former
customers of Progressive Preferred Insurance Company who
made property-damage claims on their vehicles, which
Progressive determined to be covered as total losses.
    Under policy terms, Progressive was required to pay a
totaled vehicle’s actual cash value (“ACV”), defined as “the
market value, age, and condition of the vehicle at the time
the loss occurs.” As part of its calculation of market value,
Progressive used a “projected sold adjustment” (“PSA”)—a
reduction to the list prices of comparable vehicles to “reflect
consumer purchasing behavior (negotiating a different price
than the listed price).”
    Appellants alleged that Progressive’s use of the PSA
always resulted in an inherently flawed negative line-item
adjustment, amounting to a breach of the express terms of
Progressive’s uniform automobile insurance policy because
it prevents an ACV from being determined by the true
“market value” of the vehicle.



**
  This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
          AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.        3


   The district court found that Appellants satisfied their
burden as to numerosity, commonality, typicality, and
adequacy under Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(a), but that individual
questions surrounding the calculation of each Appellant’s
ACV predominated for the purposes of Rule 23(b)(3).
    Noting that the PSA is not facially unlawful, the panel
addressed whether its implementation by Progressive could
serve as common evidence of liability, and concluded that it
cannot. As a result, Appellants faced the same problem that
the prospective class members in Lara v. First National
Insurance Company of America, 25 F.4th 1134 (9th Cir.
2022), faced: figuring out whether each individual putative
class member was harmed would involve an inquiry specific
to that person. Each individual Appellant would need to
compare their flawed “market value” with a correct one to
win on the merits. Therefore, common issues do not
predominate over any questions affecting only individual
members under Rule 23(b)(3), and class certification is
inappropriate.
    Federal Circuit Judge Wallach dissented. He wrote that
the class should be certified because questions of law or fact
common to class members predominate over questions
regarding the requirement of the contract, the breach, and the
resulting injury; and that the majority failed to reconcile in
an articulable, principled fashion intra- and inter-circuit
conflicts.
4        AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.


                        COUNSEL

Lee Lowther (argued) and Hank Bates, Carney Bates &
Pulliam PLLC, Little Rock, Arkansas; Jacob L. Phillips,
Jacobson Phillips PLLC, Winter Park, Florida; for Plaintiffs-
Appellants.
Jeffrey S. Cashdan (argued), James M. Brigman, Zachary A.
McEntyre, Erin Munger, and Allison H. White, King &
Spalding LLP, Atlanta, Georgia; Nicole Bronnimann, King
& Spalding LLP, Houston, Texas; Paul A. Mezzina and Amy
R. Upshaw, King & Spalding LLP, Washington, D.C.; Julia
B. Bates, King & Spalding LLP, Austin, Texas; Lawrence
Kasten, Papetti Samuels Weiss McKirgan LLP, Scottsdale,
Arizona; for Defendants-Appellees.
Adam G. Unikowsky, Jenner & Block LLP, Washington,
D.C.; Jonathan D. Urick and Audrey Beck, U.S. Chamber
Litigation Group, Washington, D.C.; Stephen Skardon,
American Property Casualty Insurance Association,
Chicago, Illinois; for Amici Curiae the Chamber of
Commerce of the United States of America and the
American Property Casualty Insurance Association.
          AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.         5


                         OPINION

HAWKINS, Circuit Judge:

    At issue here is whether class certification is appropriate
for challenging certain deductions in auto insurance claims,
or whether individual questions predominate. Because the
district court did not abuse its discretion in finding that
individual questions in this case predominated, we affirm.
                              I
    Elliott Ambrosio and the other named Plaintiffs
(“Appellants”) are former customers of Progressive
Preferred Insurance Company (“Progressive”). Appellants
made property-damage claims on their vehicles, which
Progressive determined to be covered as total losses
(“totaled”). According to the policy terms, Progressive was
required to pay the actual cash value (“ACV”) of their
totaled vehicles. The policies defined ACV as “the market
value, age, and condition of the vehicle at the time the loss
occurs.”
    Progressive calculated the “market value” of each
vehicle by comparing it to similar vehicles that were for sale,
or recently sold, in the insureds’ market area. Progressive
conducted this comparison by using the WorkCenter Total-
Loss system licensed from Mitchell International, Inc. (the
“Mitchell Report”). As part of its calculation, the Mitchell
Report factored in a “projected sold adjustment” (“PSA”).
The PSA is a reduction to the list prices of comparable
vehicles to “reflect consumer purchasing behavior
(negotiating a different price than the listed price).”
Progressive’s use of the PSA is the sole source of
controversy in this suit.
6         AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.


    Appellants allege that Progressive’s use of the PSA
always resulted in an inherently flawed negative line-item
adjustment. For example, the PSA allegedly does not
consider why a vehicle may have sold below a list price, such
as for inapplicable military or promotional discounts. Yet,
these types of sales were factored into the PSA calculation.
Appellants further allege that when aggregating this data on
vehicle sales, the Mitchell Report’s sources intentionally
omitted vehicles sold above the list price as “outliers.” This
resulted in the PSA only relying on data which inaccurately
skewed vehicle prices downward. Thus, according to
Appellants, the use of the PSA amounts to a breach of the
express terms of Progressive’s uniform automobile
insurance policy because it prevents an ACV from being
determined by the true “market value” of the vehicle.
    As a result, Appellants sued Progressive for breach of
contract, breach of the covenant of good faith and fair
dealing, unjust enrichment, and declaratory relief, alleging
that Progressive failed to pay the ACV of their totaled
vehicles by utilizing the PSA in their valuation reports.
Appellants sought class certification, defining the proposed
class as:

       All persons who made a first-party claim on
       a policy of insurance issued by Progressive
       Preferred Insurance Company or Progressive
       Advanced Insurance Company to an Arizona
       resident where the claim was submitted from
       March 4, 2016, through the date an order
       granting class certification is entered, and
       Progressive determined that the vehicle was
       a total loss and based its claim payment on an
       Instant Report from Mitchell where a
         AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.        7


       Projected Sold Adjustment was applied to at
       least one comparable vehicle.

    The district court found Appellants had satisfied their
burden as to numerosity, commonality, typicality, and
adequacy under Rule 23(a). Specifically, the district court
found that “the legitimacy of PSAs as a means of calculating
ACV” was a question common to the class sufficient for
Rule 23(a)(2). Nevertheless, the district court found that
individual questions surrounding the calculation of each
Appellant’s ACV predominated for the purposes of Rule
23(b)(3) and declined to certify the proposed class.
Appellants timely appealed.
                             II
    A denial of class certification is reviewed for abuse of
discretion. Parra v. Bashas’, Inc., 536 F.3d 975, 977 (9th
Cir. 2008). “A district court applying the correct legal
standard abuses its discretion only if it (1) relies on an
improper factor, (2) omits a substantial factor, or
(3) commits a clear error of judgment in weighing the correct
mix of factors.” Sali v. Corona Reg’l Med. Ctr., 909 F.3d
996, 1002 (9th Cir. 2018) (internal quotation marks omitted).
Fact findings are reviewed “under the clearly erroneous
standard, meaning we will reverse them only if they are
(1) illogical, (2) implausible, or (3) without ‘support in
inferences that may be drawn from the record.’” Abdullah
v. U.S. Sec. Assocs., Inc., 731 F.3d 952, 956 (9th Cir. 2013)
(quoting United States v. Hinkson, 585 F.3d 1247, 1262 (9th
Cir. 2009)).
                             A.
    Rule 23(b)(3) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
allows for class certification if “the court finds that the
8         AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.


questions of law or fact common to class members
predominate over any questions affecting only individual
members.” “The predominance inquiry tests whether
proposed classes are sufficiently cohesive to warrant
adjudication by representation.” Tyson Foods, Inc. v.
Bouaphakeo, 577 U.S. 442, 453 (2016) (internal quotation
marks omitted) (quoting Amchem Prods., Inc. v. Windsor,
521 U.S. 591, 623 (1997)).            Typically, individual
“damage[s] calculations alone cannot defeat certification.”
Pulaski & Middleman, LLC v. Google, Inc., 802 F.3d 979,
986 (9th Cir. 2015) (quoting Yokoyama v. Midland Nat’l Life
Ins. Co., 594 F.3d 1087, 1094 (9th Cir. 2010)). Instead, the
analysis is “whether the common, aggregation-enabling,
issues in the case are more prevalent or important than the
non-common, aggregation-defeating, individual issues.”
Tyson Foods, Inc., 577 U.S. at 453 (quotation omitted). “An
individual question is one where ‘members of a proposed
class will need to present evidence that varies from member
to member,’ while a common question is one where ‘the
same evidence will suffice for each member to make a prima
facie showing [or] the issue is susceptible to generalized,
class-wide proof.’” Id. (quoting 2 W. Rubenstein, Newberg
on Class Actions § 4:50, 196–97 (5th ed. 2012)).
                              B.
    We have wrestled with this predominance inquiry as it
relates to auto insurance policies, coming to different results.
First, in Lara v. First National Insurance Company of
America, 25 F.4th 1134 (9th Cir. 2022), an auto insurer
applied a downward “condition adjustment” to account for
the difference in price between the average condition of
privately sold cars and those sold at dealerships. Id. at 1137.
The plaintiffs disputed this adjustment as a breach of
contract and argued that the insurer’s failure to itemize the
          AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.         9


deduction violated Washington insurance regulations. Id.
We found class certification to be inappropriate because
showing “injury will require an individualized determination
for each plaintiff” which in turn predominated over any
common questions. Id. at 1138. This was because the
insurer “only owed each putative class member the actual
cash value of his or her car” and “if a putative class member
was given that amount or more, then he or she cannot win on
the merits.” Id. at 1139. Regarding the lack of itemization
as it related to state regulations, we determined that “[a]
violation of the regulation isn’t a breach. Breach of contract
requires not just a violation of the terms of the contract but
also an injury.” Id. (footnote omitted).
    Two years later in Jama v. State Farm Mutual
Automobile Insurance Company, 113 F.4th 924 (9th Cir.
2024), we were presented with a variation of the
predominance question. There, a different auto insurer
applied not only a “condition adjustment” like in Lara, but
also a “negotiation adjustment.” Jama, 113 F.4th at 927.
This “negotiation adjustment” was designed to capture the
price difference between the list price at a dealership and the
actual negotiated price a customer might typically pay. Id.
Jama determined class certification was appropriate there
because liability for this claim was not predicated on
individual assessments. Id. at 933. Unlike “condition
adjustments,” Washington state law explicitly prohibited the
use of “negotiation adjustments.” Id. Thus, the dispositive
issue was not that the insurer “failed to follow the correct
procedure for making permissible adjustments” but that
“Washington law [did] not permit [the insurer] to apply a
discount for typical negotiation at all.” Id. Therefore, the
plaintiffs in Jama could measure their injuries on a class-
10        AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.


wide basis by adding back the amount of the facially
unlawful deduction. Id.
                             III
    Considering the above guidance from Lara and Jama,
we must assess how the PSA functions here with an eye on
whether individual questions predominate. At first glance
the purpose of the PSA seems to resemble the “negotiation
adjustment” in Jama. See 113 F.4th at 927. Both were
designed to reflect the fact that cars usually sell at
dealerships for less than their listed price. See id.
    However, there is nothing facially unlawful about
Progressive’s use of the PSA here. That was the key factual
difference which Jama relied upon in differing from Lara.
See id. at 933. Appellants have alleged that the use of the
PSA always results in an unlawfully reduced “market
value,” but that only addresses the outcomes produced by the
PSA, not whether it is categorically barred by law. Cf. Sali
v. Corona Reg’l Med. Ctr., 909 F.3d 996, 1011 (9th Cir.
2018) (“Because the Code specifies that a violation of § 226
is a per se injury, there is no individualized issue of
damages.”). Without any evidence that the PSA is
disallowed on its face, its mere existence is not common
evidence of liability on its own. That makes this case more
like Lara than Jama.
    If the PSA is not facially unlawful, and thus controlled
by Jama, then we must determine whether its
implementation by Progressive could serve as common
evidence of liability. Several facts suggest it cannot. First,
the remainder of the insurance policy does not explicitly
prohibit the use of the PSA. Appellants counter that
elsewhere in the policy Progressive is required to calculate
the ACV using the “market value” of the vehicle, which they
          AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.        11


claim cannot be done accurately while using the PSA. Again
though, no further explanation of how “market value” must
be calculated exists in the policy. See Schroeder v.
Progressive Paloverde Ins. Co., No. 24-1559, 2025 WL
2083855, at *5 (7th Cir. July 24, 2025) (analyzing identical
policy language and concluding that use of the PSA was not
facially barred by the contractual terms or state law). We
cannot now read an unwritten requirement into the contract
of how to calculate “market value.” See Shattuck v.
Precision-Toyota, Inc., 566 P.2d 1332, 1334 (Ariz. 1977).
    Second, the existence of the PSA does not necessarily
indicate measurable damages, which is required to prove a
breach of contract in Arizona. See Chartone, Inc. v. Bernini,
83 P.3d 1103, 1111 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2004) (“[I]n an action
based on breach of contract, the plaintiff has the burden of
proving the existence of a contract, breach of the contract,
and resulting damages.”). If the appraisal from the Mitchell
Report resulted in a fair “market value” assessment, even
while using the PSA, then the ACV would be accurate, and
there would be no injury. This would be fatal to a potential
class member’s claim. See Thomas v. Montelucia Villas,
LLC, 302 P.3d 617, 621 (Ariz. 2013) (“the non-breaching
party [must have] actually suffered injury from the
anticipatory [breach]” (citation omitted)); see also Griffey v.
Magellan Health Inc., 562 F. Supp. 3d 34, 51 (D. Ariz. 2021)
(“In a breach of contract claim, the plaintiff must
demonstrate that the breach caused an injury.” (citing
Thomas, 302 P.3d at 621)).
    This is not a dispute over the amount of any individual’s
damages, which would be insufficient to prevent class
certification, see Pulaski, 802 F.3d at 988, but over an
essential element of each individual Appellant’s claim, see
Lara, 25 F.4th at 1139. See id. (noting that because the
12        AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.


insurer “only owed each putative class member the actual
cash value of his or her car, if a putative class member was
given that amount or more, then he or she cannot win on the
merits”); see also Drummond v. Progressive Specialty Ins.
Co., 142 F.4th 149, 159 (3d Cir. 2025) (“[B]ecause proving
the underpayment issue is essential to Progressive’s alleged
liability for breach of contract, we believe that
‘individualized evidence’ of whether each class member’s
vehicle’s ACV was greater than the final settlement value
would ‘overwhelm the case.’” (citation omitted)).
    Third, Progressive is entitled to “invoke individualized
issues and provide sufficient evidence that the individualized
issues bar recovery on at least some claims, thus raising the
spectre of class-member-by-class-member adjudication of
the issue.” Van v. LLR, Inc., 61 F.4th 1053, 1067 (9th Cir.
2023) (citation omitted). What constitutes “market value”
here is inherently a question of fact. See Stockholders &
Spouses of Carioca Co. v. Superior Court, 687 P.2d 1261,
1263 (Ariz. 1984) (defining “market value” as “the price at
which a willing seller will sell to a willing buyer”).
Progressive has provided evidence that at least two members
of the proposed class received a higher “market value”
valuation from the Mitchell Report than they would have
from other sources. Allowing Progressive to mount this
defense towards the remaining proposed class members
would render class certification inappropriate. See Zinser v.
Accufix Rsch. Inst., Inc., 253 F.3d 1180, 1189 (9th Cir. 2001)
(“[I]f the main issues in a case require the separate
adjudication of each class member’s individual claim or
defense, a Rule 23(b)(3) action would be inappropriate. . . .”
(quotation omitted)). Yet, denying Progressive this defense
altogether would seem to violate due process. See Sampson
v. United Servs. Auto. Ass’n, 83 F.4th 414, 420 (5th Cir.
         AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.       13


2023) (“This creates an explosion of predominance issues
because [the insurer] has the due process right to argue, for
each individual plaintiff, that damages should be determined
by a different legally permissible method that would produce
lower damages than NADA (or no damages at all).”).
    Appellants argue that these other sources, such as the
National Automobile Dealers Association (“NADA”) or
Kelley Blue Book (“KBB”), cannot be used to calculate
ACV because they do not comport with Progressive’s
policy. This again reads unwritten requirements into the
contract. Appellants’ own expert states that “there is no
single methodology to arrive at a proper opinion as to a
vehicle’s [ACV] . . . .” Moreover, the record indicates that
the first step in a market value appraisal is to examine a
nationally recognized valuation guide like NADA or KBB.
Accordingly, Progressive’s attempted use of NADA and
KBB is not “without support . . . .” Van, 61 F.4th at 1062
(internal citation and quotation marks omitted). Given that
this evidence could “bar recovery on some claims,” we
“must determine, based on the particular facts of the case,
‘whether individualized questions . . . will overwhelm
common ones and render class certification inappropriate
under Rule 23(b)(3).’” Id. (quoting Olean Wholesale
Grocery Coop., Inc. v. Bumble Bee Foods LLC, 31 F.4th
651, 669 (9th Cir. 2022) (en banc) (internal citation and
quotation marks omitted)).
    As a result, Appellants face the same problem that the
prospective class members in Lara faced: “figuring out
whether each individual putative class member was harmed
would involve an inquiry specific to that person.” Lara, 25
F.4th at 1139. Given that the PSA cannot serve as common
evidence of liability, each individual Appellant would need
to compare their flawed “market value” with a correct one to
14         AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.


win on the merits. This is the exact type of “aggregation-
defeating, individual issue[]” on which “members of a
proposed class will need to present evidence that varies from
member to member” that Rule 23(b)(3) intends to prevent.
Tyson Foods, Inc., 577 U.S. at 453 (quotation omitted).
Therefore, it cannot be said that common issues
“predominate over any questions affecting only individual
members.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(b)(3). Class certification is
inappropriate here.
                               IV
    There was no abuse of discretion in concluding that
individual questions predominate over common ones.
     AFFIRMED.


WALLACH, Circuit Judge, dissenting.
    Predictability is the essence of the rule of law. If a
standard insurance policy clause may wildly gyre, then
policy holders cannot know, or even guess their rights.
Without predictability, life is reduced to a state in which
might makes right and force equals success. A state of
nature is, of course, one in which Thomas Hobbes famously
said life is nasty, brutish, and short.
    Here, not only is there a conflict amongst the circuits,
there is one within this circuit: one which the majority has
failed to reconcile in an articulable, principled fashion and
which leaves Progressive’s policyholders with no loadstone
for a guide.
     I respectfully dissent.
              AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.                  15


       I. Background1
    Progressive’s Arizona Auto Policy (“the Contract”) is at
issue in this case. The district court held questions of law or
fact regarding liability affecting only individual members
“predominate” over any questions common to class
members, Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(b)(3); Ambrosio v. Progressive
Preferred Ins. Co., No. 22-cv-342, 2024 WL 915184,
at *7–8 (D. Ariz. Mar. 4, 2024), ER-13–15, and declined to
certify the class.
       II. Standard of Review
    “[W]e first review a class certification determination for
legal error under a de novo standard.” Sali v. Corona Reg’l
Med. Ctr., 909 F.3d 996, 1002, 1011 (9th Cir. 2018)
(reversing district court decision to decertify class and
explaining the “district court’s determination that individual
questions predominate in the claims of” the proposed class
“was premised on legal error”). 2 “[I]f no legal error
occurred, we will proceed to review the” district court’s
“decision for abuse of discretion” and “findings of fact under

1
    I rely on the majority’s factual background except where indicated.
2
  Although “[a]n error of law is a per se abuse of discretion,” this Circuit
has held that “we first review a class certification determination for legal
error under a de novo standard, and ‘if no legal error occurred, we will
proceed to review the . . . decision for abuse of discretion.’” Sali,
909 F.3d at 1002 (second alteration in original) (quoting Yokoyama v.
Midland Nat’l Life Ins. Co., 594 F.3d 1087, 1091 (9th Cir. 2010)). The
majority says nothing of our de novo review of legal standards. The
majority’s articulation of the standard of review only provides the abuse
of discretion prongs that are applied if a “district court [is] applying the
correct legal standard.” Maj. Op. at 7. Particularly as to the application
of Arizona law for contract interpretation, the district court did not apply
the proper legal standards. See infra Section III.C.1.a. Accordingly, the
majority errs.
16        AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.


the clearly erroneous standard.” Id. (first quoting Yokoyama,
594 F.3d at 1091; then quoting Abdullah v. U.S. Sec.
Assocs., Inc., 731 F.3d 952, 956 (9th Cir. 2013)).
     III. Analysis
     First, I discuss the requirements of the Contract under its
plain text. Second, I discuss that the alleged breach by
Progressive turns on a question common to the class because
it turns on Progressive’s methodology being unacceptable
under the Contract common to all Plaintiffs. Third, I discuss
the injury, which, as alleged, is common to all Plaintiffs: the
one-sided deduction from their cars’ actual-cash-value
Mitchell values. I take issue with this. The majority believes
there can be no predominately common injury because
Progressive contends there may be alternative methods to
value cars on an individual basis that would have left some
Plaintiffs even worse off and therefore, uninjured by what
Progressive actually paid them. Progressive never followed
these alleged methods, and the alleged alternatives were not
specifically provided for in the Contract; they were legal
chimeras. The class should be certified for a trial.
    Questions of law or fact common to class members
predominate over questions regarding the requirement of the
Contract, the breach, and the resulting injury. “Rule 23(b)(3)
requires a showing that questions common to the class
predominate, not that those questions will be answered, on
the merits, in favor of the class.” Amgen Inc. v. Connecticut
Ret. Plans & Tr. Funds, 568 U.S. 455, 459 (2013). Unlike
the district court and majority, I would not conclusively
resolve the merits of this case at the class certification stage.
Questions of law dispositive of this case may be resolved on
a class-wide basis, at appropriate stages of this case.
           AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.                17


        A. Contractual Requirements
    The Contract provides in pertinent part:

        Payments for loss to a covered auto, non-
        owned auto, or custom parts or equipment are
        subject to the following provisions: . . . The
        actual cash value is determined by the market
        value, age, and condition of the vehicle at the
        time the loss occurs.

ER-97–98. The Contract defines actual cash value (“ACV”)
owed to Plaintiff by articulating how the ACV “is
determined”—“The actual cash value is determined by the
market value, age, and condition of the vehicle at the time
the loss occurs.” (emphasis added).3 Under its terms, no
other inputs can be used to “determine[]” ACV except for
those identified in the Contract: “market value, age, and
condition of the vehicle at the time the loss occurs.”
Progressive “has no discretion to choose a system that
underpays ACV.” Plaintiffs-Appellants’ Supp. Br. at 9 n.1.
“Its discretion is fettered by the language of the contract and
‘constrained by [the insurer’s] obligation to exercise its
discretion in good faith.’” Plaintiffs-Appellants’ Supp. Br.

3
  Determination is defined as “The act of finding the precise level,
amount, or cause of something.”           Determination, Black’s Law
Dictionary (12th ed. 2024). The majority failed to engage in textual
analysis of the Contract. The majority’s atextual analysis is evident in
several omissions. For example, the majority does not even once quote
the entire sentence defining “actual cash value.” The majority does not
contain any analysis of the requirement that actual cash value “is
determined.” The majority’s analysis relies on modifying an important
term from the Contract, “market value,” with adjectives that do not
appear in the Contract: “true ‘market value,’” Maj. Op. at 6, and “fair
‘market value,’” Maj. Op. at 11.
18        AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.


at 9 n.1 (alteration in original) (quoting Beaudry v. Ins. Co.
of the W., 50 P.3d 836, 841 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2002), as
amended (July 26, 2002)).
       B. Breach of the Contract
     Progressive’s alleged breach concerned the method by
which it determined “actual cash value” under the Contract.
The district court found that “Progressive used Mitchell, and
its [] software system to make estimates on what a totaled
vehicle’s ACV should be.” Additionally, “Progressive,
through Mitchell’s ACV methodology applies a Projected
Sold Adjustment.” “Until July 2021 the data used to
calculate the Projected Sold Adjustment calculation did not
include transactions where the list price was equal to the sold
price, or where the sold price was greater than the listed
price.” After July 2021, Projected Sold Adjustment (“PSA”)
continued to be calculated using transactions where the sold
price was less than the listed price, but it added into the
calculation transactions where the sold price was equal to the
listed price. However, the PSA deduction is only applied as
a downward adjustment to the Mitchell value—it is never an
upward adjustment.
    In other words, Progressive uses the Mitchell value for
ACV, and then Progressive puts a thumb on the scale against
the insured by applying an artificial deduction. Data that is
intentionally taken only from the negative side of the scale
does not fit under what either the Contract or I recognize as
“the market value, age, and condition of the vehicle.” The
Contract’s requirement to “determine[]” ACV using certain
inputs creates a relevant duty that turns on a method. The
Seventh Circuit in Schroeder suggested this would be “a
methodological duty,” in which “each class member must
show that Progressive used an invalid method to calculate
            AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.                   19


actual cash value—independent from the result of the
calculation—to prove a breach.” Schroeder v. Progressive
Paloverde Ins. Co., No. 24-1559, --- F.4th ----, ----, 2025
WL 2083855, at *5 (7th Cir. July 24, 2025).4
    Progressive acknowledges that PSA is solely a
downward adjustment and excludes transactions where cars
sold for above list price. Defendants-Appellees’ Answering
Br. at 9 & n.1 (“Red Brief”) (stating PSA “excludes
transactions where vehicles sold for more than their
advertised prices,” and until 2021, “excluded transactions
where vehicles sold for list price”). Progressive’s theory is
that the Contract allows them to apply a PSA deduction
because it “reflect[s]” a “common-sense reality” that “many
used cars sell for less than list price.” Red Br. at 7.
Moreover, the district court concluded that Plaintiffs had
presented evidence and argument that was sufficient “to
allege common injury—that class wide PSA use led to
devalued ACVs” for the purposes of Rule 23(a)’s

4
  Schroeder reversed a class certification against Progressive’s PSA
deduction on similar facts to this case. Schroeder, --- F.4th at ----, 2025
WL 2083855, at *8. However, Schroeder did so based on a clearly
articulated difference in how it interpreted that contract. First, Schroeder
identified that Progressive’s standard-form Indiana auto insurance policy
set forth either: a “methodological duty” to “calculate actual cash value”
or a duty to pay insured a discrete amount that is “the actual cash value
of their totaled cars.” Id. at *5. The Seventh Circuit then applied the
Indiana state law definition of “fair market value” to conclude that
contract created a duty to compensate the insured by paying “the price at
which her car would change hands between a willing buyer and seller at
the time of the loss.” Id. at *6. Not only is Schroeder’s Indiana law
inapplicable here, but the majority’s citation of Carioca for the meaning
of “market value” is also inapplicable because Carioca deals exclusively
with the term in the context of “condemnation of land” under Arizona
law. Maj. Op. at 12 (citing Stockholders & Spouses of Carioca Co. v.
Superior Court, 687 P.2d 1261, 1263 (Ariz. 1984)).
20        AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.


“commonality” inquiry. ER-9. The majority, by contrast,
erroneously implies that it is only “alleged” by the Plaintiffs
(and perhaps disputed) whether PSA is a downward
adjustment. Maj. Op. at 6 (“Appellants further allege that
when aggregating this data on vehicle sales, the Mitchell
Report’s sources intentionally omitted vehicles sold above
the list price as ‘outliers.’”).
    The majority presents the issue of breach as turning on
“whether [the PSA] is categorically barred by law.” Maj.
Op. at 10. The majority errs in its ostensible fruitless search
for a “bar[] by law” in two respects.
    First, the majority asserts, without a reasoned basis, that
Progressive’s use of PSA is not “barred” because “this case
[is] more like Lara than Jama.” Maj. Op. at 10; see also
Maj. Op. at 13–14 (suggesting that if “the PSA cannot serve
as common evidence of liability,” it causes “the same
problem that the prospective class members in Lara faced”).
Even the Seventh Circuit in Schroeder—with an overall
holding amenable to the majority—would not stretch Ninth
Circuit precedent as far as the majority here. Schroeder
recognized that in both Lara and Jama, the Ninth Circuit
“assumed or held that an insurance policy contains a promise
by an insurer to calculate covered losses in accordance with
a prescribed method or formula—independent of a promise
by the insurer to pay for covered losses.”
Schroeder, --- F.4th at ----, 2025 WL 2083855, at *8 (first
citing Jama v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 113 F.4th 924,
933 (9th Cir. 2024), cert. denied, No. 24-933, 2025 WL
1678989 (U.S. June 16, 2025); then citing Lara v. First Nat’l
Ins. Co. of Am., 25 F.4th 1134, 1139 & n.4 (9th Cir. 2022)).
The Seventh Circuit noted that in Lara specifically, the
Ninth Circuit had “assum[ed] that proof of an insurer’s
failure to itemize a condition adjustment, in violation of
            AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.                  21


Washington insurance regulations, sufficed to establish the
breach element of the plaintiffs’ breach-of-contract claims.”
Id. (citing Lara, 25 F.4th at 1139 & n.4).5 The majority’s
quotation to Lara deletes footnote 4 although Schroeder
cited and discussed that footnote. Compare id. (citing Lara,
25 F.4th at 1139 & n.4), with Maj. Op. at 9 (quoting Lara,
25 F.4th at 1139).
    Second, the majority ignores that Arizona law recognizes
contracts create enforceable obligations. “[I]mplicit in the
contract and the relationship is the insurer’s obligation to
play fairly with its insured.” Rawlings v. Apodaca, 726 P.2d
565, 570–71 (Ariz. 1986). “Common evidence Progressive
exercised its discretion to always reduce ACV payments
with baseless negotiation deductions also supports
Plaintiffs’ claim for breach of the implied covenant of good
faith and fair dealing.” Plaintiffs-Appellants’ Supp. Br. at 9
n.1 (citing Garza v. Gama, 379 P.3d 1004, 1008 (Ariz. Ct.
App. 2016) (reversing order decertifying a class because the
“claim for breach of the duty of good faith and fair dealing
raises an issue common to all the members of the class”)). If
Progressive’s adhesion contractual language offers no
certainty to its policy holders, then the role of courts is to
protect those consumers against it.6

5
  Lara, of course, held that “even if a violation of the regulations is a
breach of the contract, Plaintiffs still have to show harm.” Lara, 25 F.4th
at 1139 n.4. Schroeder, thus, recognized Lara’s holding as pertaining to
“the evidence required to prove resulting damages,” not whether “an
insurer breached a methodological duty by applying an invalid
adjustment.” Schroeder, --- F.4th at ----, 2025 WL 2083855, at *5
(citing Lara, 25 F.4th at 1139).
6
  In Jama, the Ninth Circuit determined class certification was
appropriate and reversed a denial of certification. 113 F.4th at 933–35,
938. Jama held that “the unlawful conduct challenged by the negotiation
22         AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.


         C. Injury
    Questions of law or fact common to class members
predominate about whether Progressive’s breach of the
Contract caused an injury to the Plaintiffs. The PSA
deductions are all downward adjustments to the Mitchell
Value, even though the PSA deductions may vary across
individuals.7 “[E]ven if there is variation in the amount of
each class members’ damages, this is an insufficient basis by
itself to deny certification.” Sali, 909 F.3d at 1011.
     The majority holds that actual breach by underpayment
is not an injury if hypothetical performance through another
method could have resulted in even less payment to
Plaintiffs. Under the majority’s view, it is acceptable for
Defendants-Appellees to breach the insurance Contract by
using Mitchell-minus-PSA, so long as Mitchell-minus-PSA
is a higher claim payment than would have resulted from the
values in certain guidebooks—National Automobile Dealers
Association (“NADA”) and Kelly Blue Book (“KBB”). It is
error to conclude that the Contract definitively allowed
NADA and KBB and that this eliminated any common




class is applying one specific deduction.” Id. at 933 n.5. That the
conduct was prohibited by statute in Jama, while it is prohibited by
contract here, is a distinction without a difference for the purposes of
certifying a class with a predominantly common question.
7
  Prior to July 2021, the PSA deduction was based solely on values of
cars that sold below list price. After July 2021, however, the values of
cars included cars that sold both below and above list price. However,
the PSA deduction was only applied as a deduction to the Mitchell Value.
It did not ever increase the Mitchell Value.
            AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.                 23


injury. See Maj. Op. at 13–14 (“PSA cannot serve as
common evidence of liability . . . .”).8




8
  This appeal concerns the district court’s decision to deny certification
because, while it held Plaintiffs “satisfied the requirements of Rule
23(a)” such as commonality, it held Plaintiffs “d[id] not satisfy the Rule
23 (b) predominance requirement.” ER-13, ER-15. The district court
stated it was “enough to allege common injury—that class wide PSA use
led to devalued ACVs—for Rule 23(a) purposes” that Plaintiffs “possess
and plan on presenting various expert testimony regarding data that
Progressive excludes certain data to reach ACV, and empirical list/sell
data discounting the use of a PSA for valuation.” ER-9. Progressive did
not cross-appeal that holding but argues here that the district court’s
analysis is “not adequate for purposes of commonality.” Red Br.
at 60–67. Even the Third, Seventh, and Fourth Circuit Courts of
Appeals, which have reversed class certifications on Progressive’s use
of PSA for lack of predominance, have split on commonality. Compare
Drummond v. Progressive Specialty Ins. Co, 142 F.4th 149, 161 (3d Cir.
2025) (rejecting “Progressive’s challenge to commonality under Rule
23(a)(2)” as “unavailing”), with Schroeder, --- F.4th at ----, 2025 WL
2083855, at *8 (“The district court premised its analysis of commonality
and predominance on an erroneous legal conclusion . . . .”), and
Freeman v. Progressive Direct Ins. Co., No. 24-1684, --- F.4th ----, ----,
2025 WL 2435366, at *6 (4th Cir. Aug. 25, 2025) (concluding over a
dissent in a 2-1 split panel that commonality was not met). The majority
nominally affirms the district court on predominance, saying nothing of
commonality in its analysis, but its reasoning that “PSA cannot serve as
common evidence of liability” appears directed to commonality. Maj.
Op. at 10, 13–14. The majority’s analysis goes too far.
24          AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.


              1. The District Court’s Allowance of NADA
                 and KBB at Class Certification Caused a
                 Cascading Effect of Legal Errors
                  a. There Is Insufficient Evidence to
                     Conclude the Contract Allows for
                     NADA or KBB
    The district court erred at the class certification stage by
construing the Contract to conclusively permit using NADA
and KBB to calculate ACV. There was insufficient evidence
to do so. The district court conclusorily stated, “there are at
least two other alternative methodologies for providing an
ACV estimate, including the National Automobile Dealers
Association (‘NADA’) and Kelly Blue Book (‘KBB’),” ER-
3, and “[t]here are at least two other ways of estimating ACV
—NADA and KBB,” ER-14.9 Progressive has not offered
any of its own evidence, and Plaintiff has disputed, that
NADA and KBB can be used to determine “actual cash
value” under the Contract. The majority supports the district
court by relying on its shred of “evidence,” which the
majority refers to as “the record indicat[ing] that the first step

9
  The district court’s only citation for this proposition was “Doc. 46”
at 8–9. ER-3; ER-14. Document 46 in the district court docket was
Defendants’ Opposition to Plaintiffs’ Motion for Class Certification.
The brief was not included in the record on appeal. The document is in
the district court docket. Pages 2 to 3 of the original document (which
have pages 8 to 9 imprinted with an ECF header as filed on PACER in
the district court) include the same, cherry-picked, vague citation to
Plaintiffs’ expert’s deposition that the majority now relies on (the
document is redacted in part, and nothing in the readable text of pages 8
to 9 of the original document mentions NADA or KBB being used to
determine ACV). Ambrosio, No. 22-cv-342, ECF No. 46 at 2–3, 8–9 (D.
Ariz. filed Aug. 25, 2023); see also Maj. Op. at 13; SER-41. The district
court’s conclusion on this critical point, therefore, lacked clear factual
support that is evidence on appeal, but the majority accepts it absolutely.
           AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.                25


in a market value appraisal is to examine a nationally
recognized valuation guide like NADA or KBB.” Maj. Op.
at 13; SER-41. This is a cherry-picked citation to Plaintiffs’
expert’s deposition. Plaintiffs’ expert also stated in the same
deposition that NADA and KBB are “only a guide,” that do
not take into account individual characteristics of the
vehicles. SER-44. The same expert also reiterated in one of
his reports that NADA and KBB do not provide valuations
for specific vehicles or consider geographical location of the
vehicle.     ER-126–27; see also Plaintiffs-Appellants’
Opening Br. at 42 (“Blue Brief”); Plaintiffs-Appellants’
Reply Br. at 23. The majority’s conclusion on this critical
point, therefore, relies solely on a statement taken out of
context and contradicted by other evidence.10
    Under Arizona law, “a court will attempt to enforce a
contract according to the parties’ intent,” Taylor v. State
Farm Mut. Auto. Ins., 854 P.2d 1134, 1138 (Ariz. 1993),
which generally happens in one of three ways. First, if a
contract’s language is plain and unambiguous on its face, its
meaning is determined from the four corners of the
instrument. In re Mortgs. Ltd., 559 B.R. 508, 517 (Bankr.
D. Ariz. 2016) (citing Taylor, 854 P.2d at 1138–39).
Second, to determine the meaning intended by the parties, a
court may consider extrinsic evidence and surrounding

10
  In construing the Contract to conclusively permit NADA and KBB,
the district court and the majority can only be correct if the only
reasonable reliance a party could have had on “the market value” in
Section 2.g. of the Contract (ER-98) is that “the market value” includes
NADA or KBB. The district court and majority have not established a
sufficient evidentiary basis to conclude that any reasonable reliance on
the term includes NADA or KBB, but at the very least, there are multiple
reasonable interpretations, and the issue needs to be certified for
resolution as a class.
26         AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.


circumstances, including negotiation, prior understandings,
and subsequent conduct. Pure Wafer Inc. v. City of Prescott,
845 F.3d 943, 954–55 (9th Cir. 2017) (citing Taylor,
854 P.2d at 1139–40). Third, if contract language is
reasonably susceptible to more than one interpretation, the
intent of the parties is a question of fact left to the fact finder.
Chopin v. Chopin, 232 P.3d 99, 102 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2010)
(citing Taylor, 854 P.2d at 1144–45). It is unclear which
method the district court used, or why it determined this was
not a question for the factfinder, because it provided no
analysis—that in itself is an abuse of discretion.
    The district court should have held that questions of law
or fact common to class members predominate interpretation
of the Contract on the question of whether NADA or KBB
are permissible to calculate ACV. It should have certified
the class and performed the Contract interpretation at the
correct stage—that is, either through interpretation by the
court of the Contract in summary judgment, or in a trial
before a factfinder to consider a factual controversy on the
parties’ intent. The class should have been certified and the
district court should have answered this question through
standard contract interpretation methods under Arizona
law.11


11
    The Contract is narrowly circumscribed; ACV may only be
“determined” by “market value, age, and condition of the vehicle at the
time the loss occurs.” The majority, however, asserts that it would be
tantamount to “read[ing] an unwritten requirement into the contract” if
Progressive cannot determine ACV by using its PSA method. Maj. Op.
at 10–11. The majority adds that it would read an “unwritten
requirement[]” into the Contract to prohibit market value calculation
with NADA or KBB. Maj. Op. at 13. The majority says that its (and
Progressive’s) contract interpretation must follow because “no further
explanation of how ‘market value’ must be calculated exists in the
            AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.                 27


    If extrinsic evidence were considered, it would pointedly
weigh against NADA or KBB falling under the parties’
intent in the Contract. Progressive has never used either
NADA or KBB under the Arizona Policy. Progressive states
in its Red Brief that if the class was certified: “[t]he jury
would need to consider any number of alternative
methodologies for calculating ACV.” (emphasis added).
However, Progressive does not state how many alternative
methodologies the jury would need to consider; indeed,
Progressive does not identify any. There is no proof that
Progressive ever used NADA or KBB, and the only evidence
offered by the majority is a vague, out-of-context, and
contradicted statement by Plaintiffs-Appellants’ own expert,
which does not directly address whether NADA or KBB are
usable to calculate ACV.
    Unless and until proper analysis demonstrates the
Contract allowed them, NADA and KBB cannot be
considered alternatives to compare against the Mitchell-
minus-PSA for purposes of defeating Plaintiffs’ common
injuries. The district court did not consider contractual
interpretation or reasonable reliance but rather, like the
majority here, assumed that Progressive’s interpretation of
the Contract as inclusive of NADA or KBB was correct.
Unless and until proper contract interpretation demonstrates
otherwise, the triable, injury issues are predominantly
common across the class. “[E]ach class member was injured

policy.” Maj. Op. at 10–11. Why does the majority interpret a contract
to permit any method unless it is explicitly excluded by name? I believe
it is the majority that should provide “further explanation of how” PSA,
NADA, and KBB are conclusively permitted under the Contract; but the
majority fails to engage in any contract interpretation. Instead, the
district court and the majority accept Progressive’s interpretation of the
term “market value” at face value. This is an abuse of discretion.
28        AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.


in precisely the same manner” by the PSA deduction applied
to their vehicles’ Mitchell valuation. See Sali, 909 F.3d
at 1011. “[E]ven if there is variation in the amount of each
class members’ damages, this is an insufficient basis by itself
to deny certification.” Id. The district court abused its
discretion by determining that the class was insufficiently
cohesive.     Id. at 1011–12 (reversing denial of class
certification, determining the district court abused its
discretion).
               b. Even if NADA or KBB Could Have
                  Theoretically Been Used to Calculate
                  ACV, Injury Remained a Triable Issue
                  That Is Predominantly Common
                  Among the Class Members
    The core error in the district court’s analysis is that it
believes NADA and KBB are conclusively permitted by the
Contract, and that accordingly they are also alternatives that
must be compared for each individual Plaintiff against the
Mitchell-minus-PSA values, for purposes of determining if
individual Plaintiffs were injured.         Even accepting
hypothetically that NADA and KBB are permitted by the
Contract, there is still predominance of common questions
in Plaintiffs’ claims.
    I disagree with the majority that, in effect, because
Progressive theoretically could have traveled back in time to
when it determined the ACV of a Plaintiff’s vehicle and used
a NADA or KBB guidebook estimate instead of a Mitchell-
minus-PSA market valuation, “relative privation” ceases to
be privation. I share the view of other courts, that an injury
does not cease to be an injury just because another injury
could be worse. Reynolds v. Progressive Direct Ins. Co.,
No. 22-cv-503, 346 F.R.D. 120, 132 (N.D. Ala. 2024)
          AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.        29


(rejecting this defense because “[y]es, Progressive could
have harmed members more had it used some other method
of determining ACV. But the possibility of greater harm
under the NADA standard does not imply a reciprocal
benefit from using the PSA; relative privation is still
privation.”). Arizona law guarantees that “a fair trial could
be given on the issue of damages alone” in front of a jury,
and so Plaintiffs at least should have been certified to
proceed to trial on the common injury question. Chartone,
Inc. v. Bernini, 83 P.3d 1103, 1114 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2004)
(quoting Martinez v. Schneider Enters., Inc., 873 P.2d 684,
687 (Ariz. Ct. App. 1994)).
     Under Arizona law, an insurer has “some duties of a
fiduciary nature,” including “[e]qual consideration, fairness
and honesty.” Zilisch v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co.,
995 P.2d 276, 279 (Ariz. 2000) (alteration in original)
(quoting Rawlings, 726 P.2d at 571). I agree with Plaintiffs-
Appellant’s articulation in their Blue Brief, that even if
NADA and KBB were contractually permissible
alternatives, Plaintiffs have an issue to contest as a class at
trial: that Progressive may, consistent with its fiduciary-like
duties, defend itself for making a “rigged deduction” (PSA)
by simply “scroung[ing] around for an even lower non-ACV
estimate.” Bad faith, which could have been worse is still
bad faith.
    A problem with the majority’s view is that it has no
articulable limit (if any) to what methods are permitted
beyond what is provided for in the Contract. Under the
majority’s view, any method that results in any number of
Plaintiffs receiving less ACV than the Mitchell-minus-PSA
warrants a denial of class certification because Progressive
hypothetically could have used that method and injured
those Plaintiffs even more. Plaintiffs-Appellants echo the
30          AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.


same problem—that if Progressive could have used a
monkey throwing darts at a dartboard, and the dartboard’s
values sometimes were lower than the Mitchell Values for
PSA, that would defeat class certification in the majority’s
view.      Similarly, as Plaintiffs-Appellants argue, if
Progressive’s sweeping interpretation prevailed, “then
tomorrow it could simply replace the PSA deduction with an
‘Artificial Deduction – a deduction taken without factual
basis to pay you less money’ in any state that does not
foreclose such a deduction by regulation.”
         D. The Same Issue Has Been Raised, and
            Sustained in Favor of Class Certification, in
            Other Circuits
     Several Circuit Courts of Appeals have declined to block
trial on the merits of Progressive’s use of PSA by denying
permissive interlocutory review of the district court’s class
certification. E.g., Reynolds, 346 F.R.D. 120, appeal
denied, No. 24-90006 (11th Cir. June 14, 2024); Curran v.
Progressive Direct Ins. Co., No. 22-cv-878, 345 F.R.D. 498
(D. Colo. 2023), appeal denied, No. 24-700 (10th Cir. Apr.
9, 2024).
   There are numerous additional cases from U.S. district
courts around the country that have certified classes
challenging Progressive’s PSA deductions. E.g., Costello v.
Mountain Laurel Assurance Co., No. 22-cv-35, 2024 WL
239849, at *14, *21 (E.D. Tenn. Jan. 22, 2024) (R&R); 12
Volino v. Progressive Cas. Ins. Co., No. 21-cv-6243, 2023

12
   The Report and Recommendation in Costello, recommending
certification, has not been ruled on by that district court because that case
has been stayed pending the potentially dispositive appeal in a separate
case involving State Farm, to the Sixth Circuit. See generally Costello,
2024 WL 4115979 (E.D. Tenn. Sept. 5, 2024) (granting motion to stay).
          AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.       31


WL 2532836, at *9, *12–13 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 16, 2023);
Brown v. Progressive Mountain Ins. Co., No. 21-cv-175,
2023 WL 7219499, at *11 (N.D. Ga. Aug. 3, 2023). An
Ohio Court of Appeals affirmed a state trial court’s granting
class certification in a challenge to Progressive’s PSA.
Davenport v. Progressive Direct Ins., No. 114306, 2025 WL
1902437 (Ohio Ct. App. July 10, 2025); see also ECF No.
66 (Plaintiffs-Appellants’ 28(j) Letter discussing
Davenport); ECF No. 67 (Progressive’s 28(j) Letter
asserting Davenport was “wrongly decided”).
     The majority has chosen to resolve this appeal without
even acknowledging that courts around the country have
supported plaintiffs challenging Progressive’s use of PSA. I
recognize that the Third, Seventh, and Fourth Circuits have
granted permissive interlocutory review and decertified
classes on this issue. Drummond v. Progressive Specialty
Ins. Co., No. 21-cv-4479, 2023 WL 5181596, at *5–6,
*10–12 (E.D. Pa. Aug. 11, 2023), reversed, 142 F.4th
at 152; Schroeder v. Progressive Paloverde Ins. Co., 713 F.
Supp. 3d 523, 541 (S.D. Ind. 2024), reversed, --- F.4th
at ----, 2025 WL 2083855, at *1, *3; Freeman v. Progressive
Direct Ins. Co., 733 F. Supp. 3d 463, 487 (D.S.C. 2024),
reversed, --- F.4th at ----, 2025 WL 2435366, at *1. There
was a dissent on one of those panels. Freeman, --- F.4th
at ----, 2025 WL 2435366, at *8–12 (Berner, J., dissenting)
(dissenting from reversing class certification). As I noted,
they starkly contrast with the Tenth and Eleventh Circuits’
denial of permissive interlocutory review of the district
courts’ class certification. Curran, No. 24-700 (10th Cir.
Apr. 9, 2024); Reynolds, No. 24-90006 (11th Cir. June 14,
2024). The majority declines to address this incipient Circuit
split. The majority has, thus, all but ensured future splits
between the Ninth Circuit and other Courts of Appeals. For
32        AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.


that reason, among others, this case would be a good choice
for en banc review.
     IV. The Ninth Circuit’s Authority Does Not
         Support the Majority’s Approach; Lara Is
         Distinguishable; Jama Is More Analogous
         Authority; the Majority Adds to an Intra-
         Circuit Split; Olean Remains Binding En Banc
         Law
    The majority misapplies this Circuit’s precedent in Lara,
Jama, and Olean. In doing so, the majority adds to an intra-
circuit split that can only be resolved by the Ninth Circuit
taking this case en banc.
    The Lara case is distinguishable. The majority’s
discussion of Lara elides critical details. See, e.g., Maj. Op.
at 8–9. Plaintiffs in that case were merely challenging an
insurer’s failure to itemize deductions such that they could
be verified as required by Washington state law. See Lara,
25 F.4th at 1137. The alleged injury was not that the
condition adjustment was incorrect, but that the lack of
disclosure made the condition adjustment “impossible to
verify.” Plaintiffs-Appellants’ Supp. Br. at 13 (quoting
Lara, 25 F.4th at 1137 (“Plaintiffs’ theory of the case is that
Liberty violates Washington’s insurance regulations by not
itemizing or explaining this downward ‘condition
adjustment,’ which makes it impossible to verify.”)).
    In Lara, those plaintiffs challenged an unverifiable and
non-itemized vehicle condition adjustment that could affect
a valuation in either direction, arguing it violated technical
state insurance regulations. 25 F.4th at 1137. In Lara, the
statute required that “the insurer only has to pay the ‘actual
cash value’ of the car,” which the applicable Washington
statute defined as “the ‘fair market value.’” Id. at 1136
          AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.        33


(quoting Wash. Admin. Code § 284-30-320(1)). Unlike in
Lara, the Contract in this case provides specifically for how
“actual cash value” is to be “determined.” Unlike here, “[n]o
one in Lara disputed that Liberty could lawfully have
applied a properly itemized and verifiable condition
adjustment to calculate putative class members’ actual cash
value.” See Jama, 113 F.4th at 933 (citing Lara, 25 F.4th
1137, 1139).
    In Jama, Washington state law “permit[ted] insurers to
apply only those deductions explicitly laid out in [a state
law] and no others.” Id. The challenged conduct in Jama
was a “negotiation” discount meant to capture the typical
amount buyers may negotiate down the price of a
replacement car. Jama determined a so-called “negotiation
class” was amenable to be certified in that case.
    Although this case is not governed by a specific Arizona
statute, it is governed by a contract, which requires that
“[t]he actual cash value is determined by the market value,
age, and condition of the vehicle at the time the loss occurs.”
Just as the statute in Jama only allowed for certain
deductions, so too, are the deductions available under the
Contract limited to only include deductions that are “market
value, age, and condition of the vehicle at the time the loss
occurs.” The negotiation class in Jama included class
members who were paid the value determined in an
Autosource report with the negotiation discount applied,
which took a deduction/adjustment for “typical negotiation.”
Jama, 113 F.4th at 928, 931. Defining the class to include
only individuals harmed by the challenged conduct, here: the
one-sided, PSA deduction from Mitchell, “suffice[s] by
itself to prevent many of the situations we discussed at length
in Lara where class members might not have been injured
by the putatively unlawful adjustment.” Id. at 932.
34        AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.


    Even the Seventh Circuit has recognized an existing
intra-circuit split between Lara and Jama in the Ninth
Circuit regarding “the evidence required for an insured to
prove the actual cash value of her property.”
Schroeder, --- F.4th at ----, 2025 WL 2083855, at *7.
Schroeder recognized Jama as reasoning that whether each
putative class member received the actual cash value of her
car could be determined “by adding back to the value of their
vehicles as calculated in the [insurer’s valuation] reports the
amount of the [challenged] discount,” while according to
Lara it would involve a person-specific inquiry of “looking
into the actual pre-accident value of the car and then
comparing that with what each person was offered.” Id.
(alteration in original) (first citing Jama, 113 F.4th at 933;
then citing Lara, 25 F.4th at 1139). For that reason,
Schroeder declined to follow the Ninth Circuit’s “different
view of the evidence” to prove ACV. Id.
     The Freeman case also shows that other courts may draw
conflicting views from the Ninth Circuit precedent. The
Freeman majority cited Lara for support and said nothing of
Jama. --- F.4th at ----, 2025 WL 2435366, at *7. The
Freeman dissent argued that if the Projected Sold
Adjustment is an improper deduction, then “it categorically
causes Progressive to pay less than actual cash
value.” --- F.4th at ----, 2025 WL 2435366, at *11 (Berner,
J., dissenting). The Freeman dissent said the Ninth Circuit
has “endorsed this view,” and the “takeaway from Jama and
Lara is that class certification is appropriate when the
challenged adjustment categorically results in all class
members receiving less than the actual cash value.” Id.
at *11–12 (Berner, J., dissenting).
          AMBROSIO V. PROGRESSIVE PREFERRED INS. CO.          35


    Although this panel could not resolve the Ninth Circuit
split, the majority fails to advance the resolution of this issue
to what is ultimately required: an en banc proceeding.
    Additionally, the district court and the majority fail to
reconcile the Ninth Circuit’s en banc decision in Olean,
which held that Rule 23 permits certification of a class even
when the class “potentially includes more than a de minimis
number of uninjured class members.” Olean Wholesale
Grocery Coop., Inc. v. Bumble Bee Foods LLC, 31 F.4th
651, 669 (9th Cir. 2022).         Rule 23’s predominance
requirement is not to be used as an end-run around Olean
because Olean dealt with that very issue. Id. Olean’s
holding, and the dissent it overcame, dealt directly with
whether “predominance” required no more than a de minimis
number of uninjured members. Id.; id. at 691–92 (Lee, J.,
dissenting).      The majority’s focus on defeating
predominance by positing that a certain number of Plaintiffs
were potentially not injured short-circuits the Ninth Circuit’s
en banc Olean holding.
    V. Conclusion
    The parties and the law would have been better served if
this panel had addressed the intra-circuit split, and the
incipient inter-circuit split, both for the benefits of their
analyses, and for the certainty of the results. I respectfully
dissent.