United States Court of Appeals
                      For the First Circuit


No. 24-1598

                         STEVEN BERNITZ,

                      Plaintiff, Appellant,

                                v.

     USABLE LIFE; FULLSCOPE RMS f/k/a DISABILITY REINSURANCE
                       MANAGEMENT SERVICES,

                      Defendants, Appellees,

 SYNTA PHARMACEUTICALS GROUP LONG TERM DISABILITY BENEFIT PLAN,

                            Defendant.


          APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
               FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

          [Hon. Denise J. Casper, U.S. District Judge]


                              Before

                  Montecalvo, Lipez, and Aframe,
                          Circuit Judges.


          Mala M. Rafik, with whom Rosenfeld & Rafik, P.C. was on
brief, for appellant.

          Scott K. Pomeroy, with whom Byrne J. Decker and Ogletree,
Deakins, Nash, Smoak & Stewart, P.C. were on brief, for appellees.


                         August 27, 2025
            MONTECALVO, Circuit Judge.            Plaintiff-Appellant Steven

Bernitz    ("Bernitz")    was    Senior        Vice   President      of    Corporate

Development at Synta Pharmaceuticals ("Synta").                   Bernitz has a

long history of back problems, and in June 2014, he stopped working

due to chronic back pain.              For years thereafter, he received

disability benefits under a long-term disability insurance plan

administered by USAble Life ("USAble").               In 2019, however, USAble

determined that Bernitz was no longer disabled due to various

observed changes in Bernitz's lifestyle and medical condition, and

accordingly terminated his benefits.                  The benefits termination

started a lengthy phase of administrative reviews and litigation

in federal court, which culminated in the district court below

granting USAble's motion for summary judgment on all counts and

leaving    undisturbed     USAble's       initial      decision      to    terminate

Bernitz's benefits.      We affirm.

                                I.     Background

                   A.    Factual and Procedural History

            Bernitz has a history of hip and back surgeries dating

back to 1999.      In December 2013, Bernitz began working for Synta

as a Senior Vice President of Corporate Development.                      As part of

his   employment    benefits,        Bernitz   was    covered   by    a    long-term

disability insurance plan issued and administered by USAble (the

"Plan").




                                       - 2 -
                              1.    The Plan

           Several aspects of the Plan are relevant here. The first

is the Plan's definition of "disability," which is defined, in

relevant part, as:

           [a]n injury, sickness, or pregnancy [that]
           requires that you be under the regular care of
           a physician, and prevents you from performing
           at least one of the material duties of your
           regular     occupation     with     reasonable
           accommodations.    If you can perform the
           material duties of your regular occupation
           with reasonable accommodation(s), you will not
           be considered disabled.

The Plan in turn defines "material duty" as:

           the sets of tasks or skills required generally
           by employers from those engaged in an
           occupation.     [USAble] will consider one
           material duty of your regular occupation to be
           the ability to work for an employer on a
           full-time basis as defined in the policy.

The Plan requires beneficiaries to provide, upon USAble's request,

prompt proof of continued disability which may include "medical

records; hospital records; pharmacy records; test results; therapy

and office notes; mental health progress notes; medical exams and

consultations;     tax      returns;    business     records;    Workers'

Compensation     records;    payroll   and     attendance   records;    job

descriptions; Social Security award and denial notices; and Social

Security earnings records."          The Plan also permits USAble to

require beneficiaries to undergo independent medical examinations

and   interviews   to   determine   their    continuing   eligibility   for



                                    - 3 -
disability benefits.     If a beneficiary fails to "provide [USAble]

with continuing proof of disability and the items and authorization

necessary to allow [it] to determine [its] liability, [it] will

not pay benefits."      Finally, the Plan grants USAble "the sole

discretionary authority to determine eligibility for participation

or benefits and to interpret the terms of the policy."

    2.      Disability Claims Under the Plan and Social Security

            In June 2014, Bernitz stopped working due to back pain.

He submitted a disability claim under the Plan to USAble in October

2014, which USAble investigated and ultimately approved in March

2015. For about five years thereafter, USAble paid Bernitz monthly

disability benefits under the Plan's terms.       During this time,

USAble routinely verified whether Bernitz remained eligible for

disability benefits by, for example, administering a questionnaire

on his activities and daily living habits, receiving Attending

Physician's Statements from Bernitz's physicians on his medical

condition, and monitoring his public records and social media

accounts.

            In December 2014, shortly after filing his claim for

disability benefits under the Plan, Bernitz also applied for

disability benefits under the Social Security Disability Insurance

program.     This claim, after initial denials, was eventually heard

before an Administrative Law Judge ("ALJ") in June 2018.     The ALJ

shortly after that issued a written decision denying Bernitz's


                                 - 4 -
Social Security claim, noting, among other things, record evidence

of Bernitz "taking college classes, driving, taking walks up to

half   a   mile,     cooking,   taking      out   the    trash,"    "exercis[ing]

regularly with a personal trainer," traveling to "Hawaii and

National Parks in the southwest," and "spend[ing] about a month in

San Diego house-hunting," activities which, taken as a whole, were

"inconsistent with [Bernitz's] statements concerning the alleged

intensity,     persistence,        and    limiting      effects    of    symptoms."

Bernitz appealed this decision, but it was affirmed by the Social

Security Appeals Council in August 2019.

             Meanwhile, as Bernitz's Social Security claim wended

through the administrative process, USAble continued to routinely

receive and review Bernitz's medical information.                  Because USAble

rests its termination of Bernitz's benefits under the Plan on

alleged improvements         to Bernitz's physical condition starting

around 2018, we provide a brief overview of the most relevant

medical assessments from around this time.

             In May 2017, Bernitz's pain management specialist, Dr.

Yogesh Patel, submitted a routine Attending Physician's Statement

to USAble.     In it, Dr. Patel noted that Bernitz takes gabapentin

for pain management, should not sit more than one to two hours at

a time, should not stand more than thirty minutes at a time, and

should     refrain    from   any    repetitive     lifting.        The   statement

concluded:     "Patient's condition is permanent and irreversible.


                                         - 5 -
Surgery resulted in very minor symptom improvement.       Medicat[ion]

and its side effects make prolonged concentration very difficult

or impossible."     Dr. Patel followed up on this prognosis in a

January 2019 Back Disorders Questionnaire, stating his belief that

Bernitz would never return to the workforce in a full- or part-time

capacity.

            Dr.   Stewart   Russell,   USAble's   independent   medical

physician tasked with reviewing Bernitz's file, largely agreed

with that assessment as well. In October 2017, after reviewing

treatment records from twenty-one doctors, he wrote that "[b]ased

on the insured's pain complaints, his myriad of low back surgical

procedures, presence of osteoarthritis in both knees, [and his

status after] decompression surgery to [his] shoulder, it is my

opinion that the insured does not have the capacity to perform

full-time sedentary or light work."

            After USAble was informed of Bernitz's denied Social

Security claim, USAble requested updated medical records from Dr.

Patel; Dr. Ken Fujioka, Bernitz's endocrinologist; and Dr. Biraj

Shah, Bernitz's primary care physician.       These records suggested

a marked, continuing improvement in Bernitz's condition. An office

note from Dr. Shah in January 2018 said that Bernitz would be

leaving for a ten-day trip to Baja, Mexico, and that his weight at

that time was 288 pounds.     An office note from Dr. Patel in April

2018 stated that Bernitz was requesting an injection in his knees


                                 - 6 -
for an upcoming trip to Boston from California, and that his weight

was 275 pounds.          A note from Dr. Shah in August 2018 indicated

that    Bernitz's      weight   was    down    to   263   pounds     due    to    steady

exercise, that he was no longer taking gabapentin, and was "playing

pickleball and walking 6 days a week, up to an hour at a time."

Bernitz also had a travel consultation with Dr. Shah in March 2019

for a two-week safari to Africa, at which time his weight had

further decreased to 231 pounds.               Finally, a note from Dr. Patel

in     April    2019    reported      that    Bernitz     "continues       to    report

substantial relief and improved function with use of [painkiller]

medications" and that Bernitz "reports he has recently lost 70

pounds and some of his other health issues have resolved."

               USAble then ordered Bernitz to be surveilled in July,

September, and November 2019 due to what it deemed "inconsistencies

with     [Bernitz's]       reported      activities       and    the       information

documented in his updated medical records."                      The surveillance

reports indicated that Bernitz was seen walking and entering,

exiting,       and    driving   his    car    without     any   visible      signs   of

discomfort or gait issues.             He was also seen going to a gym to

work out with a personal trainer, where he used a treadmill, lifted

barbells, and did exercises on a weight machine.

               This    surveillance     prompted     USAble     to   order       another

medical review by Dr. Russell.               This review incorporated updated

records from ten of Bernitz's doctors.                     In October 2019, Dr.


                                        - 7 -
Russell observed that Bernitz had "lost [a] significant amount of

weight, thereby decompressing the low back area and allowing

significantly increased activity" and concluded that "[b]ased on

the totality of the medical information in the file, and based on

a reasonable degree of medical certainty, my prior opinion has

changed.    My opinion is that the insured is no longer impaired

from performing a full-time light physical demand occupation."

The report also noted Bernitz's travel in 2018 and 2019 to places

like Boston, Florida, Michigan, Mexico, and Africa. In a follow-up

review in December 2019, during which he examined more updated

records, including those related to a September 2019 hip surgery,

Dr. Russell maintained his conclusion that Bernitz was no longer

impaired.

                     3.     Termination of Benefits

            In   December    2019,    USAble   sent   Bernitz   a   letter

terminating his benefits.      It stated that:

            Based on a review of the updated medical
            records . . . while it is clear [Bernitz]
            suffers from a degree of chronic pain due to
            multiple failed back surgeries, his activity
            level has significantly increased since 2018
            with the loss of approximately 70 pounds and
            a regular exercise regimen. He has reportedly
            been able to walk six days per week, play
            pickle ball, work out with a personal trainer
            for one hour three days per week (both with
            aerobic exercise and resistive training),
            travel within and outside the United States
            (including a 2-week African safari trip in
            July 2019), and continue his volunteer work,



                                     - 8 -
           for which he serves on multiple boards of
           directors.

                 4.      Internal Appeals and Litigation

           In May 2020, Bernitz filed an initial appeal of USAble's

decision through the insurer's internal appeals process.                             In

support, he submitted advocacy letters from Dr. Fujioka and Dr.

Michael White, his acupuncturist; personal statements from himself

and his wife; and a Functional Capacity Evaluation report by

Barbara Tourtellott, an occupational therapist.                      Dr. Fujioka's

letter contained the following clarification regarding pickleball:

"Basically the patient took a few lessons and attempted again once

but was unable to play due his back[.]                 There may have been some

misunderstanding      between      myself     and    the   patient     if   I   stated

anything about him playing pickle ball regularly as again he has

not . . . ."1

           USAble assigned Bernitz's appeal to a senior appeals

consultant,     Sandra      Kaserman.        Another    physician,      Dr.     Richard

Maguire,   conducted        a   review   of   Bernitz's       updated   records      on

USAble's behalf and issued a report in October 2020. Dr. Maguire's

report   noted   that       Tourtellott's        evaluation    contained        various

inconsistencies       and       omissions,     but     because    of    conflicting

information in the record and in light of Bernitz's most recent



     1 Three of Dr. Fujioka's visit notes from 2018 and 2019 state
that Bernitz had "started playing pickle ball on his off days."


                                         - 9 -
surgeries,    he   recommended     that    Bernitz     attend    an   independent

medical     examination.        Bernitz    declined,     however,     expressing

concerns about COVID-19.         Kaserman thus opted to collect updated

medical records and have a third-party vendor select a doctor to

review the anthology of documents on Bernitz's condition.

             The   vendor   selected       Dr.    Richard       Kaplan,    who   is

board-certified     in   pain    medicine,       to   prepare    another    report

examining Bernitz's latest medical records.              Dr. Kaplan issued his

report in December 2020, which echoed Dr. Maguire's issues with

Tourtellott's evaluation and concluded that "[t]here are numerous

inconsistencies in the medical records as well as in the claimant's

statements which support that not only is impairment unsupported

but rather that the claimant is both capable of an increased level

of activity and that such an increased level of activity would

likely be therapeutic in nature."

             Bernitz   requested    time     to   respond   to     Dr.    Kaplan's

report, and in March 2021 said that he was being referred for

neuropsychological testing; accordingly, he requested that USAble

put   off    any   final    termination      decisions      until     after      the

neuropsychological evaluation.

             Between July and September 2021, Kaserman sent Bernitz

addendum reports by Drs. Maguire and Kaplan, both of which affirmed

their prior assessments despite new medical records relating to

Bernitz's latest round of back surgery in the summer of 2021.


                                    - 10 -
           In October 2021, Bernitz submitted additional records,

including a vocational assessment report by Michael LaRaia and a

neuropsychological evaluation conducted by Dr. Kaaren Bekken.

LaRaia's   report   stated   that   Bernitz   "remains   vocationally

unemployable" while Dr. Bekken's evaluation concluded, based on

findings of "significant cognitive impairment," that Bernitz was

"incapacitated from his own occupation."

           In response, Kaserman again sought a third-party vendor

to select a physician to review Dr. Bekken's report.      The vendor

selected Dr. Malcolm Spica, who prepared a report in October 2021

concluding that Dr. Bekken "chose to interpret the claimant's

average scores [on neurological tests] as representing impairment"

even though "[n]o evidence was provided to support the statement."

And Dr. Kaplan issued yet another review report in February 2022

in light of newly updated records, which again concluded that

Bernitz was no longer impaired. Kaserman sent Bernitz these latest

reports in February 2022, requesting a response within 21 days.

Receiving none, Kaserman sent Bernitz a termination letter on March

9, 2022.   The same day, Bernitz submitted a letter responding to

Drs. Kaplan and Spica, along with an additional letter from Dr.

Bekken.

           Bernitz then commenced this suit on May 1, 2022.

           In August 2022, USAble offered to commence a voluntary

review of the letters that Bernitz sent on the same day that


                               - 11 -
Bernitz's appeal was denied.         This final phase of the internal

appeal process consisted of a flurry of exchanges among Drs. Spica,

Kaplan, and Bekken critiquing each others' work, with no doctor

changing their medical opinions.

          In February 2023, USAble issued its final determination

letter denying Bernitz's claim.

          In June 2024, the district court ruled on the parties'

cross-motions   for   summary    judgment,   resolving   them   both   in

USAble's favor and entering judgment for USAble.

          This timely appeal followed.

                                B.   ERISA

          Because this case is governed by a specific standard of

review under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974

("ERISA"), Pub. L. No. 93-406, 88 Stat. 829 (codified as amended

in scattered sections of 26 and 29 U.S.C.), we say a few words

about the statute now.

          USAble's Plan is regulated exclusively by ERISA because

it is a privately administered employee benefit plan.            See 29

U.S.C. § 1144(a) (ERISA "shall supersede any and all State laws

insofar as they may now or hereafter relate to any employee benefit

plan").   ERISA, among other things, "controls the administration

of benefit plans as by imposing reporting and disclosure mandates,

participation and vesting requirements, funding standards, and

fiduciary responsibilities for plan administrators."        N.Y. State


                                 - 12 -
Conf. of Blue Cross & Blue Shield Plans v. Travelers Ins. Co., 514

U.S. 645, 651 (1995) (citations omitted). Denial of benefits under

an ERISA plan are subject to a particularized and deferential

standard of review, which we expand on below.

                               II.   Standard of Review

                  We review a district court's grant of summary judgment

de novo.          Field v. Sheet Metal Workers' Nat'l Pension Fund, 83

F.4th 59, 66 (1st Cir. 2023).

                  Our review of USAble's underlying termination decision,

however, remains deferential.              "Where, as here, the administrator

of an ERISA plan is imbued with discretion in the interpretation

and application of plan provisions, its use of that discretion

must be accorded deference."              Dutkewych v. Standard Ins. Co., 781

F.3d 623, 633 (1st Cir. 2015) (quoting Colby v. Union Sec. Ins.

Co.    &    Mgmt.     Co.   for    Merrimack     Anesthesia    Assocs.   Long   Term

Disability Plan, 705 F.3d 58, 61 (1st Cir. 2013)).                       This means

that       "[a]    reviewing      court   must   uphold   [the    administrator's]

decision unless it is 'arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of

discretion.'"           Id.    (quoting     Ortega-Candelaria       v.   Johnson   &

Johnson, 755 F.3d 13, 20 (1st Cir. 2014)).                    In the ERISA benefit

determinations context, the "arbitrary and capricious" and "abuse

of discretion" standards are functionally equivalent.                    See id. at

633 n.6; Leahy v. Raytheon Co., 315 F.3d 11, 15 n.3 (1st Cir. 2002)

(noting that the Supreme Court in Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. v.


                                          - 13 -
Bruch, 489 U.S. 101 (1989), did not distinguish between "arbitrary

and capricious" and "abuse of discretion" in this context).

           At    bottom,   the    question     is   whether     an   ERISA    plan

administrator's      eligibility       determination      is     "reasoned        and

supported by substantial evidence."             Dutkewych, 781 F.3d at 633

(quoting   Colby,    705   F.3d   at   62).     "Evidence       contrary     to   an

administrator's decision does not make the decision unreasonable,

provided substantial evidence supports the decision."                   Wright v.

R.R. Donnelley & Sons Co. Grp. Benefits Plan, 402 F.3d 67, 74 (1st

Cir. 2005) (citing Gannon v. Metro. Life Ins. Co., 360 F.3d 211,

213 (1st Cir. 2004) and Doyle v. Paul Revere Life Ins. Co., 144

F.3d 181, 184 (1st Cir. 1998)); see generally Leahy, 315 F.3d at

17-18   (discussing    and   resolving        the   seeming     "discongruence"

between the summary judgment standard of review and the arbitrary

and capricious standard for ERISA cases).

                             III. Discussion

           Bernitz now argues that the district court erred in

granting summary judgment to USAble for the following reasons:

(1) it failed to fully examine USAble's structural conflict of

interest as both adjudicator of claims and payor of benefits as

required by law; (2) it failed to analyze whether USAble followed

specific provisions of the Plan, including the Plan's narrow

definition      of   "disability";       and    (3) the        record    evidence

conclusively establishes that Bernitz is disabled under the Plan's


                                   - 14 -
definition of disability.          For the following reasons, we cannot

agree.

         A.     Structural Conflict and Case-Specific Factors

              Bernitz   first    argues      that   a   structural   conflict     of

interest, due to USAble serving both as the adjudicator of claims

and the payor of benefits, infected USAble's denial of Bernitz's

claim,   rendering      the   denial    of    Bernitz's     claim    an   abuse   of

discretion.       While   a     structural      conflict   plainly    exists,     we

disagree that it improperly influenced USAble's decision.

              We take a moment to place the issue of structural

conflicts in the wider context of abuse-of-discretion review.                     In

Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. v. Glenn, the Supreme Court held

that courts reviewing benefits determinations under ERISA for a

plan administrator's abuse of discretion should "tak[e] account of

several different, often case-specific, factors, reaching a result

by weighing all together."         554 U.S. 105, 117 (2008).         One of these

factors is the plan administrator's conflict of interest arising

from its dual role of both evaluating and paying benefit claims.2

Id. at 116-17.     This factor

              should prove more important (perhaps of great
              importance) where circumstances suggest a
              higher likelihood that it affected the
              benefits decision, including, but not limited

     2 Another factor identified by the Glenn Court is procedural
unreasonableness. Metro. Life Ins. Co. v. Glenn, 554 U.S. 105,
118 (2008). However, Bernitz does not meaningfully contend with
this factor, and we accordingly do not address it.


                                       - 15 -
            to,   cases   where   an   insurance   company
            administrator has a history of biased claims
            administration.      It  should   prove   less
            important (perhaps to the vanishing point)
            where the administrator has taken active steps
            to reduce potential bias and to promote
            accuracy, for example, by walling off claims
            administrators from those interested in firm
            finances, or by imposing management checks
            that   penalize   inaccurate    decisionmaking
            irrespective of whom the inaccuracy benefits.

Id. at 117 (citations omitted).             Beyond this factor, however, the

Supreme Court disclaimed any "one-size-fits-all procedural system"

for assessing abuse of discretion, recognizing that "[b]enefits

decisions    arise        in   too   many    contexts,       concern       too    many

circumstances, and can relate in too many different ways to

conflicts -- which         themselves    vary   in   kind    and      in   degree   of

seriousness."          Id. at 116.   Our circuit has likewise declined to

establish    a    "one-size-fits-all        list   of   factors."          Lavery    v.

Restoration Hardware Long Term Disability Benefits Plan, 937 F.3d

71, 79 (1st Cir. 2019).              Instead, we summarized the ultimate

abuse-of-discretion inquiry as asking:               "To what extent has [the

plan   administrator]          conducted    itself      as   a    true     fiduciary

attempting to fairly decide a claim, letting the chips fall as

they may?"       Id.

            Equipped       with   this     understanding,        we   turn   to     the

particulars of this case.            First, we must parse precisely what

Bernitz argues on appeal, since it appears to us that he conflates

how much weight we should place on the structural conflict factor


                                      - 16 -
on the one hand, with the abuse-of-discretion analysis generally

on the other hand.    At one point, Bernitz asserts that the district

court "erred in failing to assess whether USAble's conflicted role

manifested in a biased, inaccurate claims process that led to an

unreasonable termination of benefits."          But Bernitz at another

point acknowledges that the district court "addressed USAble's

mitigation of its financial conflict [but] committed reversible

error by failing to evaluate the more record-based, 'case-specific

factors' in assessing the reasonableness of USAble's decision."

We address each assertion in turn.

                       1.   Structural Conflict

            First, the district court affirmatively observed that

"[b]ecause [USAble] both adjudicated Bernitz's claim and also bore

responsibility for paying out benefits . . . a structural conflict

exists."     Bernitz v. USAble Life, No. 22-CV-10712-DJC, 2024 WL

3106249, at *8 (D. Mass. June 24, 2024).             The district court

then -- correctly, in our view -- "afford[ed] little weight to

[the] same because [USAble] took sufficient steps to insulate its

claims determination process."       Id.; see Denmark v. Liberty Life

Assur. Co., 566 F.3d 1, 9 (1st Cir. 2009) ("[C]ourts are duty-bound

to inquire into what steps a plan administrator has taken to

insulate    the   decisionmaking    process    against   the   potentially

pernicious effects of structural conflicts.").             For instance,

USAble     employed   third-party    vendors    to   select    independent


                                   - 17 -
physicians to analyze Bernitz's medical records.                    It used a

separate appeals unit to review the initial denial of Bernitz's

claim.   And it made good-faith benefit payments under reservation

of rights while Bernitz appealed USAble's initial termination

decision and USAble continued reviewing updated medical records.

Each of these facts diminishes the weight that we place on the

structural conflict here.         See Glenn, 554 U.S. at 117.

          Nor do we see contrary record evidence that merits

putting more weight on the structural conflict.              For example, the

record does not reflect that USAble "has a history of biased claims

administration,"     id.,     or    that      USAble     provided     blatantly

inconsistent   reasons      for    termination,     or     denied   Bernitz   a

reasonable opportunity to respond to USAble's explanations as to

why it deemed him no longer disabled under the Plan, cf. Lavery,

937 F.3d at 79-81.

          Accordingly, we assign no error to the district court's

analysis of the structural conflict present here.

                     2.      Case-Specific Factors

          Second,    Bernitz        submits     a   list     of     purportedly

"case-specific factors" which, by his telling, "suggest[] that

[USAble's] structural conflict of interest continued to play a

role":




                                    - 18 -
            •   The Plan's "narrow" definition of disability, which

                requires Bernitz to show that he was unable to perform

                at least one of several duties of his position;

            •   The    Plan's    internal   guidance      requiring      USAble   to

                explain why it disagrees with Bernitz's experts;

            •   USAble's emphasis on its own consultants' opinions

                despite their alleged "failure to engage with the

                relevant evidence and the Plan standard";

            •   USAble's "selective review of contrary medical and

                vocational evidence";

            •   The    district     court's     "misinterpretation         of     the

                S[ocial ]S[ecurity ]A[dministration]'s decision"; and

            •   USAble's reliance on Bernitz's weight loss, exercise,

                and travel.

Most of these, however, are not "case-specific factors" but rather

characterizations        of   record    evidence   that    is     unfavorable     to

Bernitz. And we have already established that "[e]vidence contrary

to   an   administrator's        decision   does   not     make    the    decision

unreasonable,         provided    substantial      evidence        supports       the

decision."      Wright, 402 F.3d at 74.

            And as for USAble's alleged "misinterpretation of the

SSA's decision," this too is not a case-specific factor.                   Neither

do we see how the denial of Bernitz's Social Security claim bears



                                       - 19 -
on USAble's structural conflict, since that claim was adjudicated

in an entirely separate administrative process.

            Finally, as for Bernitz's remaining contentions about

the Plan's express terms, it is unclear how they relate to USAble's

structural    conflict,      since    they     do   not    obviously       describe

structural aspects of USAble's and Bernitz's relationship that

would motivate USAble to either deny or pay benefits.                  And so, we

read his contentions as a more general attack on the analytical

soundness    of   USAble's    claim    evaluation.          Because    a   "flatly

incorrect interpretation of the Plan" calls into question the

ultimate fairness of USAble's evaluation, Lavery, 937 F.3d at 80,

we consider his argument below.

                              B.      Plan Terms

            Bernitz argues that USAble failed to follow the express

provisions of its own Plan -- namely, the Plan's definition of

disability    and    its     requirement       that       USAble   explain     any

disagreement with or non-reliance on the medical assessments of

Bernitz's treating physicians.          Again, we disagree.

            An abuse-of-discretion inquiry must "consider the text

of the ERISA plan and the plain meaning of the words used therein,

which cabin the plan's administrator's discretion."                Santana-Díaz

v. Metro. Life Ins. Co., 919 F.3d 691, 695 (1st Cir. 2019) (citing

Colby, 705 F.3d at 65).              "[O]nce a plan is established, the

administrator's duty is to see that the plan is 'maintained


                                      - 20 -
pursuant to [that] written instrument.'"           Heimeshoff v. Hartford

Life & Accident Ins. Co., 571 U.S. 99, 108 (2013) (quoting 29

U.S.C. § 1102(a)(1)) (second alteration in original).             However,

"[u]nder [the ERISA]      standard, we need not decide the 'best

reading'   of   the   Plan.   We    need    only   consider   whether   [the

administrator's] interpretation of the Plan and its application of

the Plan terms to the facts of this case was 'reasoned and

supported by substantial evidence.'"        O'Shea through O'Shea v. UPS

Ret. Plan, 837 F.3d 67, 73 (1st Cir. 2016) (quoting Stamp v. Metro.

Life Ins. Co., 531 F.3d 84, 94 (1st Cir. 2008)).

           We thus turn to the Plan terms at issue: the definition

of disability and USAble's obligation to explain where and when it

departs from the assessments of Bernitz's physicians.            Examining

each, we conclude that USAble's interpretation and application of

the terms were reasoned and supported by the administrative record.

                 1.     Plan Definition of Disability

           As a reminder, the Plan defines "disability" as:

           [a]n injury, sickness, or pregnancy [that]
           requires that you be under the regular care of
           a physician, and prevents you from performing
           at least one of the material duties of your
           regular     occupation     with     reasonable
           accommodations.    If you can perform the
           material duties of your regular occupation
           with reasonable accommodation(s), you will not
           be considered disabled.

 And it defines "material duty" as:




                                   - 21 -
              the sets of tasks or skills required generally
              by employers from those engaged in an
              occupation.     [USAble] will consider one
              material duty of your regular occupation to be
              the ability to work for an employer on a
              full-time basis as defined in the policy.

USAble conducted a vocational assessment for Bernitz's job to more

specifically define the set of tasks and skills that relate to his

role   as    marketing   executive.           The     assessment    identified    the

following physical demands required by that role:

              •   "Frequent:          Sitting          (position        changes)[;]

                  Fingering/Keyboarding[;]             Reaching[;]       10       lbs.

                  Lifting/Carrying[;] 10 lbs. Pushing/Pulling[;]"

              •   "Occasional:    Handling[;]          Crouching[;]     Standing[;]

                  Walking[;]     20    lbs.     Lifting/Carrying[;]       20      lbs.

                  Pushing/Pulling[;] Traveling."

The parties appear to agree that, putting all this together,

Bernitz would be disabled under the Plan if he could not perform

at least one of the physical demands identified in the vocational

assessment.

              Bernitz argues that USAble never applied this framework

for disability to the evidence.                 In particular, he claims that

USAble      never   explained     whether       the    alleged     improvements    in

Bernitz's condition which occasioned the benefits termination

meant that Bernitz could now perform every single occupational

duty listed above and that USAble had Bernitz's medical records



                                       - 22 -
evaluated without also providing its reviewers the Plan's standard

of disability.     However, that is not what the record shows.

              First, USAble's termination decision rests heavily on

Bernitz's significant weight loss and its attendant health and

back pain benefits; his travel to domestic and international

destinations, including a safari in Africa; and reports of Bernitz

taking college classes, driving, walking up to half a mile,

exercising with a personal trainer, and playing pickleball.          We

find that these justifications, documented in Bernitz's medical

files and surveillance reports, reasonably support the conclusion

that Bernitz was able to perform every single material duty

identified in the vocational assessment.3

              Second, USAble clearly did share the Plan definition of

disability with the independent reviewers: the medical review

forms    in    question   specifically    analyze   Bernitz's   physical

capabilities with respect to the physical tasks identified in the

vocational assessments, which the parties agree determine the


     3 For similar reasons, we also reject Bernitz's argument that
USAble improperly used the "[Social Security] total disability
standard" instead of the Plan's definition. First, Bernitz neither
provides what that standard is nor meaningfully explains how it
differs from the Plan's definition. Cf. 20 C.F.R. § 404.1520(f)
(Social Security Disability Insurance definition of disability:
"Your impairment(s) must prevent you from doing your past relevant
work."). Second, USAble's termination letters open by explicitly
stating the Plan's definition of disability; they do not cite or
reference the Social Security definition. Thus, we cannot agree
that USAble employed the wrong disability standard, or that its
disability determination was analytically flawed.


                                 - 23 -
meaning of disability under the Plan.                     See Bernitz, 2024 WL

3106249, at *9 n.5.          And at any rate, the Plan's definition of

disability     and    the   job        tasks   identified     by    the    vocational

assessment do not comprise a hyper-technical rubric.                      Rather, they

form a common-sense description of the daily routine of a marketing

executive: sitting, typing, standing, walking, and occasionally

traveling.      The    administrative          record    supportably       shows     that

Bernitz could meet every enumerated physical demand by the time

USAble terminated his benefits.

           We thus conclude that USAble both properly identified

the   Plan's    definition        of    disability      and   applied      it   to   the

administrative record.

               2.     Disagreement with Treating Physicians

           Bernitz next contends that USAble failed to explain why

it disagreed with Bernitz's treating physicians' conclusions that

he was disabled, as the Plan required.                  While we agree that the

Plan requires this kind of explanation, we disagree that USAble

failed to provide it.

           USAble's         own        policies    require         adverse      benefit

determination letters to explain, among other things, "the basis

for disagreement with or non-reliance on: views of health care




                                         - 24 -
professionals treating the claimant and vocational professionals

who evaluated the claimant."4

            By our read, USAble's determination letters did just

that.    For instance, USAble's 2019 letter engages with the 2017

Attending    Physician    Statement       from    Bernitz's    pain    management

specialist    Dr.    Patel,     including       and   especially    Dr.   Patel's

diagnosis of failed back syndrome and observation that Bernitz's

condition    "is    permanent    and    irreversible."        The     letter   also

discusses Dr. Patel's 2019 Back Disorders Questionnaire in which

Dr. Patel described Bernitz's pain level as "severe" and noted

"Mr. Bernitz would never be able to return to the workforce in a

part-time or full-time capacity."

            USAble's 2019 letter then continues to summarize records

obtained from more than thirty of Bernitz's medical providers which

document,    among     other     things,        Bernitz's     vaccinations      and

injections for domestic and international trips in 2018 and 2019;



     4 Bernitz also traces this obligation to a 2018 Department of
Labor regulation, 29 C.F.R. § 2560.503-1(j)(6), which he contends
supplants an observation made by the Supreme Court in Black &
Decker Disability Plan v. Nord, 538 U.S. 822 (2003), that
administrators need not explain their reliance on evidence that
conflicts with a treating physician's evaluation until the
Department of Labor directs them to do so. While we disagree with
Bernitz's account of Nord -- the relevant portion addresses
whether to "accord extra respect to treating physicians'
opinions," id. at 831, not how much explication is required when
disagreeing with them -- we observe at any rate that the 2018
regulation is in relevant part materially identical to the language
found in the Plan.


                                       - 25 -
that he played pickleball and walked six days per week, for up to

an hour at a time; his markedly lower blood pressure; his ceased

use of gabapentin; and his loss of roughly seventy pounds due to

regular exercise.        It then summarizes what rounds of surveillance

revealed: Bernitz walking and entering, exiting, and driving his

car with no signs of pain or gait issues; and going to a gym to

work out with a personal trainer, which included using a treadmill,

lifting barbells, and using a weight machine to perform pull-downs

and leg extensions.         The 2019 letter concludes: "while it is clear

[Bernitz] suffers from a degree of chronic pain due to multiple

failed     back     surgeries,   his    activity    level   has   significantly

increased since 2018 with the loss of approximately 70 pounds and

a regular exercise regimen."

              And USAble's 2022 letter, occasioned by Bernitz's appeal

of   the     2019    termination    decision,      also   explained      that   two

independent physicians found inconsistencies and deficiencies in

a    March    2020     Functional      Capacity    Evaluation     that    Bernitz

underwent.        It then proceeded to explain those flaws in detail.

              These determination letters, we think, amply explain why

USAble disagreed with the "views of health care professionals

treating [Bernitz] and vocational professionals who evaluated

[him]":      at   bottom,    substantial    evidence      regarding      Bernitz's

lifestyle and activities contradicted the assessment that Bernitz




                                       - 26 -
could no longer sit, stand, and occasionally travel as required by

his vocation.

            We thus conclude that USAble satisfied its burden of

explication under the Plan.

                            C.   Record Evidence

            Finally, Bernitz assails the evidentiary basis on which

USAble concluded that he is no longer disabled under the Plan.

Bernitz mainly challenges the reliability of unfavorable reports

and medical assessments and argues that favorable, conflicting

evidence    should   have    prevailed     over   the    adverse    evidence.

Constrained by the standard of review, however, we see no basis

for overturning the district court's judgment.

            There is no doubt that the administrative record here,

amounting to some 8,000 pages, permits conflicting inferences

regarding Bernitz's ability to do his job as defined by the Plan

around the time that USAble terminated his benefits.               However, it

is emphatically not our place to "review the ingredients of the

administrative record de novo, without deference to the plan

administrator's findings."       Leahy, 315 F.3d at 18.       Rather, as we

have explained, we ask only the following: is USAble's decision to

terminate    Bernitz's      benefits     "reasoned      and   supported    by

substantial evidence[?]"         Dutkewych, 781 F.3d at 633 (quoting

Colby, 705 F.3d at 62).




                                  - 27 -
              We think it is.         USAble's account of the record -- as

set   forth    in   its   2019    and    2022    determination   letters -- is

sufficient for us to find that USAble's decision was backed by

well-developed reasons based on substantial documented evidence of

Bernitz's improved condition by the time USAble deemed him no

longer disabled.

                                 IV.    Conclusion

              The   judgment     of     the   district   court   is   therefore

affirmed.




                                        - 28 -