United States Court of Appeals
                        For the First Circuit


No. 23-1589

      CANGREJEROS DE SANTURCE BASEBALL CLUB, LLC; SANTURCE
               MERCHANDISING LLC; THOMAS J. AXON,

                       Plaintiffs, Appellants,

                                  v.

   LIGA DE BÉISBOL PROFESIONAL DE PUERTO RICO, INC.; CRIOLLOS
 MANAGEMENT, INC.; RA12, INC.; INDIOS DE MAYAGÜEZ BASEBALL CLUB
 INC.; GIGANTES DE CAROLINA BASEBALL CLUB INC.; LEONES DE PONCE
 CF INC.; JUAN A. FLORES GALARZA, in his official and personal
      capacity; IMPULSE SPORTS ENTERTAINMENT CORPORATION,

                        Defendants, Appellees,

              CONJUGAL PARTNERSHIP FLORES-DOE; JANE DOE,

                             Defendants.


           APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                 FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO

           [Hon. William J. Young,* U.S. District Judge]


                                Before

                         Barron, Chief Judge,
                 Thompson and Gelpí, Circuit Judges.


     Jeffrey K. Kessler, with whom Jeffrey J. Amato, Lauren E.
Duxstad,   Robert  S.   Pannullo,   Lauren  Gailey, Carlos  A.
Rodriguez-Vidal, Winston & Strawn LLP, and Goldman Antonetti &
Cordova, LLC were on brief, for appellants.

    *Of   the District of Massachusetts, sitting by designation.
         Francisco E. Colón-Ramírez, with whom José F. Cáceres
    Cardona, José M. Marxuach, Colón Ramírez LLC, Cáceres Law Offices,
    LLC, and Marxuach LLC were on brief, for appellees.


                              July 21, 2025

1
            BARRON, Chief Judge.          More than a century ago, the

Supreme Court of the United States held that the Sherman Act does

not apply to "[t]he business [of] giving exhibitions of base ball

[sic]."   Fed. Baseball Club of Balt. v. Nat'l League of Pro. Base

Ball Clubs, 259 U.S. 200, 208 (1922).         Since then, the Court has

acknowledged the "aberration[al]" and "anomal[ous]" nature of the

so-called   "business    of   baseball"    exemption    from   this   federal

antitrust statute.      Flood v. Kuhn, 407 U.S. 258, 282, 285 (1972).

The Court also has acknowledged the persistent criticism that

shielding    this    "business"    from     that    statute's     reach    is

"unrealistic, inconsistent, or illogical."             Id. at 282 (quoting

Radovich v. Nat'l Football League, 352 U.S. 445, 452 (1957)).

Nonetheless, the Court has "voiced a preference that if any change

is to be made, it come by legislative action."            Id. at 283.     The

exemption thus remains in place.

            There are    questions, however,       about the exemption's

scope -- questions that are at the heart of this appeal.          It arises

from a suit by the former owner-operator of a franchise in a

professional baseball league in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico

and two limited liability corporations of which he is the sole

member.   The plaintiffs named as the defendants, among others, the

league's president, the league itself, and the owners of the

league's other franchises.      The plaintiffs allege that, in forcing



                                  - 3 -
the former owner of the franchise to relinquish his control over

and interest in that franchise, the defendants violated the Sherman

Act, a federal civil rights statute, Puerto Rico antitrust law,

Puerto Rico fair competition law, and a Puerto Rico tort statute.

            The United States District Court for the District of

Puerto Rico dismissed the plaintiffs' Sherman Act claims based on

the "business of baseball" exemption.               It further ruled that the

plaintiffs'    claims      under    Puerto       Rico's    antitrust   and     fair

competition laws were preempted precisely because those claims

alleged conduct that constituted the "business of baseball."                    The

District    Court   also      dismissed     on    res     judicata   grounds    the

plaintiffs' remaining federal claim, which was brought pursuant to

a federal civil rights law.         The District Court then exercised its

discretion to dismiss the plaintiffs' other Puerto Rico law claim,

which was before it based on supplemental jurisdiction under 18

U.S.C. § 1367.

            We agree with the District Court that the "business of

baseball"   exemption        applies   to   the    Puerto     Rico   professional

baseball league involved in this suit.                  We also agree that the

exemption   applies     to    the   conduct      that   the   plaintiffs     allege

violated the Sherman Act.           We thus affirm the dismissal of the

Sherman Act claims.

            We do not agree, however, with the reason that the

District Court gave for dismissing the Puerto Rico antitrust or


                                       - 4 -
fair competition claims, which was that they must be dismissed as

preempted   under   the     Supremacy      Clause   of    the    United    States

Constitution.     Nor do we agree with the District Court that res

judicata precludes the plaintiffs' federal civil rights claim.                  We

therefore vacate the District Court's ruling dismissing the Puerto

Rico antitrust and fair competition claims and reverse its ruling

dismissing the federal civil rights claim.               Moreover, because we

reverse the District Court's ruling dismissing the plaintiffs'

federal civil rights claim, we also must reverse its ruling

dismissing the remaining Puerto Rico law claim.

                                      I.

                                      A.

            On   July 18,    2022,   the     plaintiffs,        Thomas    J.   Axon

("Axon"), Cangrejeros de Santurce Baseball Club, LLC ("Cangrejeros

LLC"), and Santurce Merchandising LLC filed a complaint (the

"Complaint") in the U.S. District Court for the District of Puerto

Rico.   The suit named as defendants Liga de Béisbol Profesional de

Puerto Rico, Inc. (the "League"); Criollos Management, Inc. (the

"Criollos"); RA12, Inc. ("RA12"); Indios de Mayagüez Baseball

Club, Inc. (the "Indios"); Gigantes de Carolina Baseball Club,

Inc. (the "Gigantes"); Leones de Ponce CF, Inc. (the "Leones");

Impulse Sports Entertainment Corporation ("Impulse Sports"); Juan

A. Flores-Galarza, in his capacity as president of the League and




                                     - 5 -
his personal capacity ("Flores"); Jane Doe; and the conjugal

partnership existing between Flores and Jane Doe.

              The   Complaint    included      seven   counts.     It   alleged:

(1) unreasonable          restraint   of     competition    in    violation   of

section 1     of    the    Sherman    Act,   15   U.S.C.    § 1   (Count   One);

(2) conspiracy to monopolize in violation of section 2 of the

Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2 (Count Two); (3) unreasonable restraint

of competition in violation of Puerto Rico antitrust law, P.R.

Laws   Ann.    tit.    10,    § 258    (Count     Three);   (4) conspiracy    to

monopolize in violation of Puerto Rico antitrust law, P.R. Laws

Ann. tit. 10, § 260 (Count Four); (5) unfair methods of competition

and deceptive acts and practices in trade and commerce in violation

of Puerto Rico law, P.R. Laws Ann. tit. 10, § 259; P.R. Laws Ann.

tit. 31, §§ 10801, 10803 (Count Five); (6) the tort of contracts

in prejudice of a third person in violation of Puerto Rico's

General Tort Statute, P.R. Laws Ann. tit. 31, §§ 10801, 10803

(Count Six); and (7) a violation of 42 U.S.C. § 1983 based on the

defendants acting with the Mayor of San Juan to deprive the

plaintiffs of their property without due process (Count Seven).

                                        B.

              The Complaint alleged the following facts in support of

these claims.




                                       - 6 -
                                       1.

            The League is the "only top-tier professional baseball

league    in   Puerto   Rico."1       In    October   2019,    Axon,     through

Cangrejeros    LLC,2    purchased    operating   control      of   one   of   the

League's franchises, the Cangrejeros de Santurce (the "Cangrejeros

Franchise").

            On February 4, 2022, Axon became the sole member and

chairman of Cangrejeros LLC.          That company continued to operate

the Cangrejeros Franchise.          The franchise is one of the League's

six, all of which are located within Puerto Rico and each of which

is owned and operated separately.

            The League's teams play against one another in Puerto

Rico.    The League's champion plays in the Caribbean Series against

teams from the Dominican Republic, Mexico, and Venezuela.




     1  As alleged in the complaint, two other professional
leagues -- the Puerto Rico Independent Baseball League and the
Liga de Béisbol Superior Doble A de Puerto Rico -- operate within
Puerto Rico. They "adhere to a semi-professional model," do not
attract the same "level of player talent" as the League, and "do
not compete in the same relevant markets as the League."
     2 The complaint alleged that Cangrejeros LLC was formed on
September 16, 2019.    "Cangrejeros LLC was established for the
purposes of (a) owning and operating the Cangrejeros de Santurce
Baseball Team; and (b) transacting any and all lawful business for
which a limited liability company may be organized under the
Corporations Law that is incident, necessary or appropriate to
accomplish   the   foregoing,   including,   without   limitation,
contracting for necessary or desirable services of professionals
and others."


                                     - 7 -
            Flores was at all relevant times the president of the

League.    In that capacity, he oversaw all the League's operations.

            The Constitution of the Liga de Béisbol Profesional de

Puerto Rico, Inc. (the "League Constitution") governs the League's

operations.    Through Section 2.01(A) of the League Constitution,

the   League   contractually      confers    the   rights     to   operate   its

franchises to private investor-operators.

            The League's teams compete against one another on the

field, and the franchises themselves compete "for fans, in-person

attendance, player talent, sponsorships, merchandise sales, radio,

and    streaming      broadcast       rights       agreements."              The

investor-operators    do    not    share    franchise     profits     with   one

another.

            As the sole member of Cangrejeros LLC, Axon invested in

the   Cangrejeros   Franchise.       He     "measurably      increased   player

quality, improved fan experience, broadened the fan base, promoted

and   established    new   broadcasts,       enhanced     sponsorships,      and

expanded    merchandising      opportunities."          He     also    expanded

broadcasting reach in the continental United States, commissioned

a documentary film about his team, offered higher salaries to

players, and proposed a preseason exhibition tournament.

                                     2.

            The Cangrejeros Franchise plays its home games at the

Hiram Bithorn Stadium (the "Bithorn") in San Juan, Puerto Rico, by


                                    - 8 -
virtue of an Agreement for the Administration and Operation of the

Franchise, dated August 10, 2017.               The Bithorn is owned and

administered by the Municipality of San Juan.               Miguel Romero Lugo

("Romero") was the Mayor of San Juan at the time that the Complaint

was filed.     During the relevant period, the stadium suffered from,

among other things, a broken scoreboard, inadequate running water,

broken toilets, and a failing roof.

              On February 18, 2022, Axon's counsel sent a letter to

Mayor Romero on behalf of Cangrejeros LLC.              The letter addressed

a    leaked   communication    about   the    state   of    the   Bithorn.      It

explained that Axon's proposals to upgrade the stadium stemmed

from a desire to "make the Bithorn a living and visible monument

to    a   cornerstone   of   Puerto    Rico's   proud      history   and   sports

culture."      (Citation modified).

              Axon's letter proposed that Cangrejeros LLC make repairs

to the stadium through an estimated $2 million investment in

exchange for an exclusive fifteen-year lease of the venue to the

Cangrejeros Franchise.         Mayor Romero, on behalf of San Juan,

rejected this proposal in a press release.

              On March 8, 2022,       following   Romero's press release,

Cangrejeros LLC informed Flores that the conditions at the Bithorn

necessitated     considering    relocating      the   franchise      to    another

stadium in Puerto Rico.        Cangrejeros LLC indicated that an option




                                      - 9 -
had arisen for the Cangrejeros Franchise to play its games at a

stadium in better shape in the Municipality of Humacao.

          At a League Board meeting on February 22, 2022, Axon

advised the teams and the League that he would no longer accept a

municipal sponsorship from San Juan for the Bithorn.     He believed

that such a sponsorship would not be adequate to ensure that

necessary improvements to the stadium would be made.

          In a press conference held on March 10, 2022, Axon

announced this same message publicly.      In this public statement,

he referenced the Bithorn's defects, the negative impact of these

defects on player performance and fan engagement, and San Juan's

failure to correct these defects or provide adequate funds to do

so.   He further stated that San Juan's repeated failure to invest

in the Bithorn and San Juan's unwillingness to collaborate with

the Cangrejeros Franchise on proposed solutions had necessitated

the contemplated movement of the team to a different stadium in

another municipality.

          Axon hoped the press conference would encourage the

League to work with him to have San Juan fulfill its obligations

to improve the stadium or, if San Juan continued to resist, to

move the team to another municipality.       Acting in concert with

Mayor    Romero   and   with   the      agreement   of   the   other

investor-operators, Flores soon thereafter took steps to force

Axon to relinquish his control over the Cangrejeros Franchise.


                               - 10 -
            Flores sent Axon a letter dated March 14, 2022.                         It

indicated   that    Axon   had    engaged       in    conduct    "detrimental       to

baseball" and to the League in violation of § 8.02 of the League

Constitution.      Flores then ordered the Cangrejeros Franchise to

remove Axon both from the League Board and as a shareholder of the

Cangrejeros      Franchise       and     threatened        to      terminate       the

investor-operator     agreement        between       Cangrejeros    LLC     and    the

League.

            Flores also wrote to the Municipality of Humacao.                      His

letter stated that the League did not endorse relocating the

Cangrejeros Franchise to Humacao.

            Cangrejeros LLC responded to Flores through a letter,

dated March 17, 2022.        In that letter, Cangrejeros LLC challenged

the assertion that Axon had engaged in any acts detrimental to

baseball or the League.

            On March 18, 2022, Flores called a special meeting of

the League Board to discuss the Cangrejeros Franchise and sanctions

against Axon.      Axon requested to attend, but the League Board met

without him.

            On   March 29,     2022,     Flores       informed     Axon     that    by

agreement of the League Board, made up primarily of the competing

investor-operators who controlled the other franchises, Axon had

been   suspended    from   all    functions      and     participation       in    the

Cangrejeros Franchise and the League for two years.                       He further


                                       - 11 -
informed Axon that he was fined $5,000 and placed on probation for

one year after expiration of the suspension.

                                    3.

           After   learning   of    these   actions,   Axon     sought   a

preliminary injunction and declaratory judgment in the Superior

Court of San Juan against the League and Flores to prevent his

suspension from taking effect.       Axon v. Liga De Beisbol Pro. de

Puerto Rico, Inc., No. SJ-2022-CV-02802 (Super. Ct. P.R. May 5,

2022).   Axon alleged that permitting his suspension to take effect

would freeze the Cangrejeros Franchise's access to capital and

result in the cessation of club operations.

           The Superior Court held a hearing on Axon's motion for

a preliminary injunction on April 22, 2022.        Section 3.01 of the

League   Constitution   states     that   "shareholders   and    official

representatives must be accepted by the Board" to be "members" of

the League.    The Superior Court interpreted this provision to mean

that Axon was not a "member" of the League at the time of his

suspension.3    The Superior Court then concluded that because Axon


     3This outcome, according to the pleadings, resulted from Axon
inadvertently removing himself from the League Board.           On
February 14, 2022, Axon's personal counsel informed Flores that
Lino Rivera, the Chief Operating Officer of the Cangrejeros
Franchise, and Saúl Suárez, who the Complaint describes as a
"Cangrejeros employee," would be the franchise's representatives
to the League Board.     On February 22, 2022, the League Board
confirmed Rivera and Suárez as members representing the
Cangrejeros Franchise on the League Board. Axon's counsel believed



                                 - 12 -
was not a member of the League, he was not entitled to the

protections and procedures of § 3.05 and § 3.06 of the League

Constitution.             Those    provisions     specify      the    grounds      for

termination of membership and procedures for member separation.

The Superior Court thus ruled that the League Board had the power

to suspend Axon, as a nonmember of the League, and that Axon was

not    entitled    to     protections    under    the    League's    constitution.

Accordingly,       the    Superior     Court    denied    Axon's     motion    for    a

preliminary injunction.

                                          4.

            Following the Superior Court's ruling, Flores informed

the plaintiffs on May 17, 2022, that the League was seizing the

interests of Cangrejeros LLC in the Cangrejeros Franchise pursuant

to § 3.06 of the League Constitution.                Flores indicated to them

that Axon's filing of a legal action -- in which Axon allegedly

made    false     representations       regarding       his   membership      in   the

League -- violated the investor-operating agreement and permitted

the    League     Board    to     permanently    terminate     the   interests       of

Cangrejeros LLC in the Cangrejeros Franchise.

            The League Board met virtually on May 31, 2022.                        The

attendees included many of the defendants: Raul Rodríguez of the


that Axon held permanent Board membership in his role as sole
member   of  Cangrejeros   LLC;  however,   the   League Board's
confirmation of Rivera and Suárez as representative members in
fact revoked Axon's position on the League Board.


                                        - 13 -
Criollos; José Feliciano and Juan Carlos Ramírez of the Indios;

Javier Hernández of the Gigantes; Roberto Alomar and Marisol

Irizarry of RA12; and Oscar Misla of the Leones.

           The   meeting   also    included    Rivera   and    Suárez    as

representatives of the Cangrejeros Franchise.           The League Board

denied Axon's request to testify at the meeting.

           Rivera argued at the meeting on behalf of Cangrejeros

LLC.   He indicated that Axon would accept a two-year suspension in

exchange for the League not terminating the investor-operator

rights of Cangrejeros LLC.        The League Board, however, voted to

terminate the investor-operator agreement of Cangrejeros LLC and

to seize all of the plaintiffs' economic and operation rights in

the franchise without any compensation.

           On June 5, 2022, Flores reported that the League was

seeking a new investor-operator for the Cangrejeros Franchise.

Flores acknowledged that two entities had expressed interest in

becoming the investor-operator for the franchise in February 2022,

several months before Axon had been suspended.

           On or about June 13, 2022, the League announced that

Impulse Sports had been selected as the new investor-operator of

the    Cangrejeros   Franchise.      Impulse   Sports    had   filed    for

incorporation in Puerto Rico on May 20, 2022, eleven days before

the League Board terminated Cangrejeros LLC's interests in the

Cangrejeros Franchise as an investor-operator.


                                  - 14 -
           After Impulse Sports gained control of the Cangrejeros

Franchise,     it   publicized   its    intention    to   strengthen    the

Franchise's ties to Mayor Romero.         On July 7, 2022, when Impulse

Sports   was   introduced   as   the   new   owner   of   the   Cangrejeros

Franchise, Mayor Romero participated in the announcement and sat

alongside Impulse Sports in a show of government support.

           At the press conference, Impulse Sports stated that it

would be "strengthening ties with the mayor."         In response, Mayor

Romero stated that the Bithorn stadium would be made ready for the

upcoming season.

                                   C.

           Some weeks after the press conference, Axon, Cangrejeros

LLC, and Santurce Merchandising LLC filed the Complaint that gives

rise to this appeal in the United States District Court for the

District of Puerto Rico.    On September 12, 2022, the League, later

joined by some of the competing franchises, moved to dismiss the

Complaint for failure to state a claim under Federal Rule of Civil

Procedure 12(b)(6).      That motion argued (1) that the plaintiffs

are contractually bound to litigate their claims in the local

courts of Puerto Rico; and (2) that the plaintiffs' action is

barred by res judicata after the plaintiffs lost their prior case

filed in the local court of Puerto Rico.

           Then, on October 27, 2022, the defendants moved under

Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1) to dismiss the Complaint


                                 - 15 -
for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.                 They argued that the

District Court lacked subject matter jurisdiction over the federal

antitrust claims, because the relevant conduct constituted the

"business of baseball," and the state claims brought under Puerto

Rico antitrust law and fair competition law, for the same reason.

The plaintiffs timely opposed these motions.

            On   June 27,    2023,    the     District    Court   granted   the

defendants' motions and dismissed the case.              It dismissed for want

of jurisdiction the federal antitrust claims and the claims brought

under Puerto Rico antitrust and fair competition laws because of

the "business of baseball" exemption.              It dismissed the § 1983

claim for failure to state a claim based on the doctrine of res

judicata.    It then declined to exercise supplemental jurisdiction

over the remaining Puerto Rico law claim.

            With   respect   to   the   federal     antitrust     claims,   the

District Court noted that it was "boldly go[ing] where no lower

court has gone before" by applying the "business of baseball"

exemption to the League.      The District Court explained that it was

doing so because it rejected the plaintiffs' arguments that the

baseball exemption applies only to Major League Baseball (MLB) and

MLB's direct affiliates, thereby becoming the first lower court

since Federal Baseball to hold that the exemption may apply to a

professional baseball league other than MLB or an affiliate of it.




                                     - 16 -
          The District Court then addressed, still with respect to

the Sherman Act claims,    whether "the conduct averred in the

Complaint still falls outside of the 'business of baseball'"

because of the nature of the alleged conduct.      The plaintiffs

argued that the conduct did.     The District Court rejected that

argument and reasoned that:

          the [p]laintiffs['] claims involve an alleged
          conspiracy    involving   an   owner    of   a
          professional franchise that was dismissed
          under the League's regulations. This involves
          the business of baseball. . . . The Sherman
          Act baseball exemption applies to the [League]
          and the Cangrejeros [Franchise] since they are
          a [sic] professional baseball team, and the
          antitrust claims arise in the context of the
          business of baseball.

          After concluding that the baseball exemption barred the

Sherman Act claims, the District Court also dismissed the claims

under Puerto Rico antitrust and fair competition law.   As to those

claims, the District Court stated, in full:

          [The   Puerto   Rico    antitrust   and   fair
          competition    claims]     are    consequently
          dismissed based on the Supremacy Clause as the
          Supreme Court held in Flood [that] "state
          antitrust regulation would conflict with
          federal policy and . . . national 'uniformity
          (is required) in any regulation of baseball.'"
          407 U.S. at 284 (quoting Flood v. Kuhn, 316 F.
          Supp. 217, 280 (S.D.N.Y. 1970)).

(Second alteration in original).   The Court thus dismissed Counts

Three, Four, and Five.




                               - 17 -
           The District Court next addressed the plaintiffs' § 1983

claim and concluded that claim           "must be dismissed under the

doctrine of res judicata."        (Citation modified).        The District

Court applied § 3343 of the Puerto Rico Civil Code, P.R. Laws Ann.

tit. 31, § 3343, and noted that to satisfy § 3343, a party must

show "(i) the existence of a [final] judgment on the merits . . .;

(ii) a perfect identity of thing or cause between both actions;

and (iii) a perfect identity of the parties and the capacities in

which they acted."   (Quoting R.G. Fin. Corp. v. Vergara-Nuñez, 446

F.3d 178, 183 (1st Cir. 2006)).     The District Court concluded that

the earlier judgment from the San Juan Superior Court satisfied

these requirements and thus barred adjudication of the plaintiffs'

§ 1983 claim.

           Having dismissed     all the     plaintiffs'   claims arising

under   federal   law,   the   District    Court   declined   to   exercise

supplemental jurisdiction over the remaining claim arising under

Puerto Rico law, which was a contract law claim, and dismissed the

case.   See Roche v. John Hancock Mut. Life Ins. Co., 81 F.3d 249,

257 (1st Cir. 1996); 28 U.S.C. § 1367.        The plaintiffs thereafter

timely appealed the District Court's judgment.

                                   II.

           We review de novo a district court's grant of a motion

to dismiss for failure to state a claim under Rule 12(b)(6) or for

lack of subject matter jurisdiction under Rule 12(b)(1).              Legal


                                  - 18 -
Sea Foods, LLC v. Strathmore Ins. Co., 36 F.4th 29, 34 (1st Cir.

2022); Lyman v. Baker, 954 F.3d 351, 359 (1st Cir. 2020).           Although

dismissals under Rules 12(b)(1) and 12(b)(6) are "conceptually

distinct, . . .     the   same      basic     principles    apply   in   both

situations."      Lyman, 954 F.3d at 359 (quoting Hochendoner v.

Genzyme Corp., 823 F.3d 724, 730 (1st Cir. 2016)).

          In both contexts, we accept as true the complaint's well-

pleaded factual allegations and draw all reasonable inferences in

the plaintiffs' favor.       Id.; Cheng v. Neumann, 51 F.4th 438, 443

(1st Cir. 2022).    We disregard "conclusory legal allegations" and

factual assertions that are "too meager, vague, or conclusory to

remove   the   possibility    of     relief    from   the   realm   of   mere

conjecture."    Legal Sea Foods, 36 F.4th at 33 (first quoting

Cardigan Mountain Sch. v. N.H. Ins. Co., 787 F.3d 82, 84 (1st Cir.

2015); and then quoting SEC v. Tambone, 597 F.3d 436, 442 (1st

Cir. 2010) (en banc)).

          To survive a Rule 12(b)(6) motion, "a complaint must

contain sufficient factual matter, accepted as true, to 'state a

claim to relief that is plausible on its face.'"                Ashcroft v.

Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678 (2009) (quoting Bell Atl. Corp. v.

Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007)).          A claim is facially plausible

"when the plaintiff pleads factual content that allows the court

to draw the reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for

the misconduct alleged."      Id.


                                    - 19 -
               Under Rule 12(b)(1), we also disregard "statements in

the complaint that simply offer legal labels and conclusions or

merely rehash cause-of-action elements," and consider whether the

non-conclusory, non-speculative facts support the existence of

subject matter jurisdiction.         Lyman, 954 F.3d at 360 (quoting

Schatz v. Republican State Leadership Comm., 669 F.3d 50, 55 (1st

Cir.       2012)).   We   may   consider    information   attached   to   or

incorporated into the complaint, along with facts subject to

judicial notice.       Id.

                                    III.

               The plaintiffs contend that the District Court erred in

dismissing their Sherman Act claims because the "business of

baseball" exemption applies only to conduct that involves MLB and

its affiliates.       They argue in the alternative that the District

Court erred in dismissing the claims because the nature of the

specific conduct alleged would not constitute the "business of

baseball" even if MLB and its affiliates engaged in it.              We are

not persuaded by either contention.4

                                     A.

               The plaintiffs bring two claims under the Sherman Act.

They bring the first under section 1 of that statute. That section



       The District Court held that the applicability of the
       4

exemption deprived it of subject matter jurisdiction and dismissed
the federal antitrust claims under Rule 12(b)(1). The plaintiffs



                                   - 20 -
makes unlawful "[e]very contract . . . or conspiracy, in restraint

of trade or commerce among the several States, or with foreign

nations."   15 U.S.C. § 1.   In support of this claim, the plaintiffs

allege that the "[d]efendants have entered into a continuing

conspiracy in unreasonable restraint of trade to boycott and

exclude [the plaintiffs] from the relevant markets and to replace

them with a more malleable competitor."    They also allege that the

conspiracy "will reduce product quality and output in the relevant

markets" and that "[i]t also has no procompetitive justification."

            The plaintiffs bring their second Sherman Act claim

under section 2 of that statute.         That section provides that

"[e]very person who shall monopolize, or attempt to monopolize, or

combine or conspire with any other person or persons, to monopolize

any part of the trade or commerce among the several States, or


contend on appeal that "there is no jurisdictional issue in play"
because the exemption is a merits issue, not a jurisdictional one.
We agree. See Garber v. Off. of the Comm'r of Baseball, 120 F.
Supp. 3d 334, 339 (S.D.N.Y. 2014) ("[T]he scope of the baseball
exemption is not a jurisdictional issue. It is a threshold merits
issue."); Arbaugh v. Y&H Corp., 546 U.S. 500, 511 (2006) ("Subject
matter jurisdiction in federal-question cases is sometimes
erroneously conflated with a plaintiff's need and ability to prove
the defendant bound by the federal law asserted as the predicate
for relief -- a merits-related determination." (quoting 2 Moore's
Federal Practice § 12.30[1] (3d ed. 2005))). To the extent that
the Eleventh Circuit has suggested that the exemption imposes a
jurisdictional bar, Pro. Baseball Sch. & Clubs, Inc. v. Kuhn, 693
F.2d 1085, 1085 (11th Cir. 1982), we disagree. We thus proceed to
address whether the plaintiffs' claims must be dismissed pursuant
to Rule 12(b)(6). See Lin v. TipRanks, Ltd., 19 F.4th 28, 36 (1st
Cir. 2021) ("We, of course, may affirm the District Court's ruling
on any ground manifest in the record.").


                                - 21 -
with foreign nations, shall be deemed guilty of a felony" and

subject to a fine.       15 U.S.C. § 2.

            The   plaintiffs       allege      that    the   defendants     violated

section 2    of   the    Sherman    Act      because     they    "entered    into   a

continuing combination or conspiracy with the specific intent of

acquiring and maintaining monopoly power in the relevant markets."

They also allege that the "league and its investor-operators have

a 100 percent share of the relevant markets and exercise their

monopoly power by controlling entry into those markets" and that

the defendants unlawfully "exclud[ed] [the plaintiffs] from the

relevant markets."

                                          B.

            The plaintiffs are right that, after Federal Baseball,

"[n]o other case has ever broadly interpreted the exemption to

apply to entities not part of MLB."                They also are right that the

exemption has received significant criticism.                   Flood, 407 U.S. at

282.   But     neither    the   exemption's           past   application    nor   the

longstanding      criticism     that    it     has     engendered     supports    the

conclusion that it applies only to MLB and its affiliates and so,

for that reason alone, not the League.

                                          1.

            Federal     Baseball    did      not   describe     the   "business     of

baseball" exemption in terms of the specific professional baseball

leagues that were parties to that case or to any specific league


                                       - 22 -
at all.   259 U.S. at 208-09.        It defined the exemption in terms of

an activity       -- the activity being           "the business [of] giving

exhibitions of base ball [sic]."            Id. at 208.

            The    Supreme    Court's       subsequent     treatment    of    the

exemption has been no different.            In Toolson v. New York Yankees,

Inc., for example, the Court characterized its own precedent as

holding "that the business of providing public baseball games for

profit between clubs of professional baseball players was not

within the scope of federal antitrust laws."                346 U.S. 356, 357

(1953) (emphasis added) (citing Fed. Baseball, 259 U.S. 200).

Similarly, in      Flood,    the Court quoted that same language               to

reaffirm the exemption, 407 U.S. at 273 (quoting Toolson, 346 U.S.

at 357), and so again made clear that the exemption protects the

"business of providing public baseball games for profit between

clubs of professional baseball players," see id. (quoting Toolson,

346 U.S. at 357), rather than a particular entity engaged in that

business.

            The    plaintiffs       point    to     language   from     National

Collegiate    Athletic      Ass'n   v.   Alston     that   observes    that   the

"[Supreme]    Court    has    refused       to    extend   Federal    Baseball's

reasoning to other sports leagues."               594 U.S. 69, 95 (2021).      In

context, though, the Court was referring in that passage to leagues

involved in sports other than baseball, not professional baseball

leagues other than MLB.        See, e.g., United States v. Int'l Boxing


                                     - 23 -
Club of N.Y., 348 U.S. 236, 242, 245 (1955) (recognizing the

exemption applies to the "business of baseball" and declining to

extend exemption to professional boxing without mentioning the

MLB); Radovich, 352 U.S. at 451 (noting precedent "restrict[ed]

Toolson's coverage to baseball" but not mentioning MLB); Haywood

v. Nat'l Basketball Ass'n, 401 U.S. 1204, 1205 (1971) (noting that

"[b]asketball . . . does not enjoy exemption from the antitrust

laws" notwithstanding the Court's "decisions exempting baseball

from the antitrust laws" (emphases added)); see also United States

v.   Shubert,   348   U.S.   222,   229-30   (1955)   (characterizing    the

exemption as applying to "the baseball business" and declining to

extend the exemption to other live presentations).

           The plaintiffs also point to language from Radovich that

indicates that the Court "specifically limit[ed] the rule" of

Federal Baseball "to the facts there involved," 352 U.S. at 451.

They contend that this language shows that the exemption does not

apply to a league -- like the one involved in this case -- that

was not a party to Federal Baseball itself or a successor to such

a party.

           Radovich     referred,     however,   to    "the   business    of

organized professional baseball" as being synonymous with "the

facts there involved."       Id.    As we have explained, the Court has

consistently defined the "business of baseball" in terms of the

nature of activity undertaken, rather than the identity of the


                                    - 24 -
entity engaged in that activity. So, we do not understand Radovich

to hold that the "business of baseball" concerns only the exact

conduct involved in Federal Baseball and, for that reason, to

exclude conduct involving the League.        Indeed, Flood held that the

MLB's reserve clause constituted the "business of baseball," 407

U.S. at 285, even though that league's reserve clause obviously

was not at issue in Federal Baseball.

                                       2.

          The    plaintiffs    separately    argue   that    the    exemption

cannot   apply   to   the     League    because    "the   Supreme     Court's

justification for continuing to adhere to the Federal Baseball

exemption in Flood was stare decisis -- a rationale that only

applies to MLB's reliance interest." The need to protect the MLB's

reliance interest, however, was only one of the grounds that the

Court gave in Flood for reaffirming the exemption.

          In     discussing     Toolson,     the     Flood    Court     noted

"Congressional awareness for three decades of the Court's ruling

in Federal Baseball, coupled with congressional inaction" and "[a]

professed desire that any needed remedy be provided by legislation

rather than by court decree."      407 U.S. at 273-74.       The Court noted

as well that Federal Baseball had been "cited, not unfavorably,

with respect to the practice of law; with respect to out-of-state

contractors; and upon a general comparison reference."                Id. at

271-72 (citations omitted).        Additionally, the Court in Flood


                                  - 25 -
indicated that the exemption    "rests on a recognition and      an

acceptance of baseball's unique characteristics and needs."    Id.

at 282 (emphasis added).

          That last rationale focuses on the attributes of the

professional sport of baseball, not the specific professional

league that was a party to Flood.    The various grounds offered in

Flood for supporting the exemption therefore fail to support the

plaintiffs' argument that the exemption's "rationale . . . only

applies to MLB's reliance interest."    Accordingly, we reject the

plaintiffs' contention that the Supreme Court's only justification

for maintaining the exemption was MLB's reliance interest.

                                C.

          The plaintiffs alternatively contend that, even if the

exemption applies to the League, the exemption "does not cover

every type of anticompetitive conspiracy engaged in by a baseball

league and its teams simply because the commerce restrained happens

to be part of the baseball business."     They go on to argue that

this "limited" exemption applies only to activities that are

"'central' to organizing and operating a baseball league" and that

the alleged conspiracy here does not fall within that more limited

conception of the exemption's scope.     As we will next explain,

however, we conclude that, even under the "central to" formulation,

the plaintiffs have failed to show that the District Court erred




                              - 26 -
in holding that the exemption applies to the plaintiffs' Sherman

Act claims.

                                        1.

          Before    the    District      Court,    the    defendants     took   a

seemingly sweeping view of the exemption's scope.                They appeared

to argue that, insofar as the exemption applies to the League and

not just MLB and its affiliates, it applies in this case simply

because the League is itself a professional baseball league.                    As

the defendants put it below, "[T]here is no doubt that [the League]

is a professional baseball league in Puerto Rico . . . and thus

the exemption applies."

          The plaintiffs responded by arguing that "the mere fact

that the parties are involved in the baseball business . . . does

not   shield      all     of     [the        d]efendants'      conduct      under

the . . . exemption."          They    argued    that    the   "exemption    only

applies to protect conduct that qualifies as the 'business of

baseball,' in the narrow manner by which that term has been defined

by the courts."    The plaintiffs then asserted that the "business

of baseball" only includes conduct central to the operation of

professional baseball leagues -- and so not to all conduct in which

the League engages -- as this understanding "is consistent with

how courts have interpreted the exemption for decades."

          In fleshing out this argument, the plaintiffs cited

lower court decisions from other circuits that, in their view,


                                      - 27 -
apply the exemption in this more limited manner.                  See, e.g.,

Henderson Broad. Corp. v. Hous. Sports Ass'n, Inc., 541 F. Supp.

263, 265 (S.D. Tex. 1982) ("[B]roadcasting is not central enough

to baseball to be encompassed in the baseball exemption.").              The

plaintiffs then contended that the "anticompetitive conspiracy

alleged" here falls outside the scope of the exemption because it

"does not involve conduct that is 'central' to operating a baseball

league."   In their view, the alleged conspiracy "has nothing to do

with player rules, rules of the game, or any other League rule or

bylaw that could even arguably fall within the                  'business of

baseball.'"      (Emphasis added).

           The    District    Court   did   not   adopt   the    defendants'

seemingly categorical view that the exemption applies to any

conduct by the League.       It explained that the exemption applied in

this case because the "alleged conspiracy involv[es] an owner of

a professional franchise that was dismissed under the League's

regulations" and so "involves the business of baseball."             It then

also observed that "the antitrust claims arise in the context of

the business of baseball."

           The District Court relied on two of the precedents that

the defendants cited, namely Right Field Rooftops, LLC v. Chicago

Baseball Holdings, LLC, 87 F. Supp. 3d 874 (N.D. Ill. 2015), and

Wyckoff v. Office of the Commissioner of Baseball, 211 F. Supp. 3d

615 (S.D.N.Y. 2016).      In concluding that the exemption applied,


                                   - 28 -
the courts in those cases considered the nature of the conduct

alleged to violate the Sherman Act and determined that it was

"central to the public display of baseball games," Right Field

Rooftops, 87 F. Supp. 3d at 885, or "an integral part of" and

"central to the 'business of baseball,'" Wyckoff, 211. F. Supp. 3d

at 626-27.    They also contrasted conduct of that sort with conduct

that falls outside the exemption because it is "incidental" or

"wholly collateral to" to the public display of baseball games.

Id. at 626 (first quoting Right Field Rooftops, 87 F. Supp. 3d at

885; and then quoting City of San Jose v. Off. of the Comm'r of

Baseball, 776 F.3d 686, 690 (9th Cir. 2015)).

             It is arguable that, by invoking Wyckoff and Right Field

Rooftops, the District Court implicitly deemed the alleged anti-

competitive conduct here to be "central" or "integral to" the

public display of baseball games and so, for that reason, the

"business of baseball."       The District Court did not expressly

characterize the conduct in those terms, however.          Nor did it

elaborate on why either of the cases it cited supported the legal

proposition that claims fall within the exemption if they merely

"arise in the context of the business of baseball," "involv[e] an

owner   of       a    professional    [baseball]    franchise,"       or

"involve[e] . . .     [l]eague   regulations."     It   also   did   not

otherwise explain why those cases show that the exemption applies

to the alleged conspiracy here, except by stating that               "the


                                 - 29 -
[p]laintiffs[']    argument . . .     is   overly    narrow,   as   was   the

[plaintiffs'] reading of the exemption in the Right Field Rooftops

case."

            In our view, therefore, it is not entirely clear that

the District Court assessed the conduct alleged to violate the

Sherman Act here along a "central to" versus "wholly collateral

to" axis.     As a result, it is not entirely clear that, in ruling

that the exemption applied, the District Court determined that the

conduct satisfied the "central to" test that the plaintiffs ask us

to embrace.

            Nonetheless,   we   may      affirm   the   District    Court's

dismissal of the plaintiffs' Sherman Act claims on any ground

manifest in the record.     See Brox v. Hole, 83 F.4th 87, 98 (1st

Cir. 2023).    And, as we will next explain, we conclude that, even

if we were to apply the "central to" test that the plaintiffs

derive from the lower court precedents, the plaintiffs' arguments

on appeal fail to show that, under that test, the exemption has no

application here.

                                    2.

            We recognize that extensions of the exemption beyond the

factual context that gave rise to it are not permitted, because

the Supreme Court has "specifically limit[ed] the rule" of Federal

Baseball "to the facts there involved."             Radovich, 352 U.S. at

451.     And while Radovich makes clear that those "facts" are ones


                                - 30 -
that constitute "the business of baseball," id., rather than the

precise facts involved in Federal Baseball itself, we can see how

a decision to extend the exemption to allegedly anti-competitive

conduct by a professional baseball league or its affiliates with

respect to broadcasting agreements, see Henderson, 541 F. Supp. at

265, or agreements with concessionaires at league games, see Twin

City Sportservice, Inc. v. Charles O. Finley & Co., 512 F.2d 1264

(9th Cir. 1975), might be thought to violate that directive.

           Such conduct is arguably "incidental" to the business of

putting   on   games   for   public   display   in   a   way   that,   say,   a

professional baseball league's enforcement of a reserve clause in

players' contracts is not, see Flood, 407 U.S. at 282.            The latter

type of league conduct -- unlike the former type -- directly

impacts the product on the field because it directly impacts who

the players on the field are.

           Moreover, precisely because the former type of conduct

does not have such a direct on-the-field impact, extending the

exemption to such conduct has no obvious stopping point.                It is

not easy to distinguish the markets for              broadcast rights in

professional baseball games or concessions in the live exhibition

of such games from the markets in trading cards, video games, or

league-related merchandise.

           Extending the exemption to the former type of conduct

thus risks expanding an already much-criticized exemption to wide


                                  - 31 -
swaths of economic activity just because such activity relates in

some way to professional baseball.        No similar risk of exemption

creep appears to be presented by applying the exemption to the

factual context presented here. Such an application merely shields

from federal antitrust scrutiny the League's decisions to enforce

its established rules for determining who will run, own, and

control the League's own teams.

          It   is   true,   of   course,     that   owners   --   unlike

players -- do not take the field.    But the plaintiffs do not appear

to be of the view that this fact in and of itself precludes the

exemption's application.    But see Postema v. Nat'l League of Pro.

Baseball Clubs, 799 F. Supp. 1475, 1489 (S.D.N.Y. 1992) (explaining

that "baseball's relations with non-players are not a unique

characteristic or need of the game" and thus do not fall within

the scope of the exemption), rev'd on other grounds, 998 F.2d 60

(2d Cir. 1993).     As the plaintiffs recognize, the Wyckoff court

held that professional baseball league personnel -- in that case,

team scouts -- can be involved in the "business of baseball" due,

in part, to the integral role that they play in selecting the

talent that then participates on the field during those games.

See 211 F. Supp. 3d at 626-27.            Yet, scouts do not directly

participate in the public display of the game itself, and the

plaintiffs do not develop an argument that Wyckoff was wrongly




                                 - 32 -
decided    because    it    treated     scouts    as    being      involved     in    the

"business of baseball."

            The plaintiffs do attempt to distinguish Wyckoff.                        They

do so on the ground that a scout's "role [is] 'so extraordinarily

unique' to the game that it [is] 'an integral part of' and 'central

to the "business of baseball."'"              (Quoting id.).         But that ground

for    distinction        fails    because     Wyckoff       did    not     limit     the

applicability of the exemption to conduct that is -- or roles that

are -- "'extraordinarily unique' to the game of baseball."                         Id. at

626.    In referring to that strict potential formulation of the

"central    to"    test,     the    Wyckoff    court        was   just     quoting    the

characterization that the plaintiffs there had offered of the role

that scouts played.         Id.

            In    addition,       Wyckoff     ultimately      concluded       that    the

exemption applied because the scouts' role was not "incidental" to

the    "business    of     baseball,"    and     not    because      that     role    was

"extraordinarily unique" to baseball.                See id.       The court came to

that conclusion, in part, because "scouts' identification and

targeting of particular players greatly influences the Franchises'

decisions about which players to hire and what team to field."

Id. at 626-27.

            That reasoning          is no less applicable here.                    If an

individual's       role    is     "central"    to,     or    at    least    more     than

"incidental" to, the public display of baseball games when that


                                       - 33 -
individual's role "greatly influences the Franchise's decisions

about which players to hire and what teams to field," id., then it

is hard to see why the role of an owner of a professional baseball

franchise would be "incidental."    Owners of professional baseball

franchises -- from Walter O'Malley, who owned the Brooklyn Dodgers

when the team signed Jackie Robinson, to Harry Frazee, who owned

the Boston Red Sox when the team traded Babe Ruth -- have been

foundational figures in the development of professional baseball

precisely because of their decisions "about which players to hire

and what teams to field," id.

          The   plaintiffs   themselves   appear   to   recognize    the

centrality and importance of owners to, as Toolson put it, the

"business of providing public baseball games for profit between

clubs of professional baseball players."     346 U.S. at 357.       They

allege in their own Complaint that the former owner who was ousted

here "measurably increased player quality," "invested resources to

entice higher-quality baseball players to play," and "proposed

essential renovations to improve the conditions of the stadium for

fans."

          We recognize that, in Piazza v. Major League Baseball,

831 F. Supp. 420 (E.D. Pa. 1993), the district court suggested

that "the market for ownership interests in existing baseball

teams" may not fall within the scope of the exemption.         Id. at

439-440; see also id. at 441 ("[A]cquiring an ownership interest


                                - 34 -
in a team may very well be no more unique to the exhibition of

baseball games than is moving players and their equipment from

game to game.").      But, in that case, the court also acknowledged

that   ownership   decisions   that    "implicate    matters   of    league

structure . . . [could] be covered by the exemption."          Id.

           In any event, the plaintiffs do not appear to deny that

a league's efforts to enforce its rules about team ownership may

fall within the exemption.      The plaintiffs contend only that the

enforcement of the rules here is not within the exemption because,

as they described it to the District Court, the enforcement does

not involve a "League rule or bylaw that could even arguably fall

within the 'business of baseball.'"       They do not explain, though,

why the League rules at issue here are not "central" to the

business of a professional baseball league.          They instead merely

assert -- in conclusory fashion -- that the rule that the League

is alleged to have enforced in harming the plaintiffs is not within

the "business of baseball" because it "had nothing to do with the

necessary rules for operating a baseball league or its 'unique

characteristics.'"      Yet, as we have explained, a professional

baseball   league's    established    rules   for   determining     who   may

operate one of the teams in a baseball league would appear to have

quite a lot to do with "operating a baseball league."

           The plaintiffs also invoke an amicus brief filed by the

U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) in another case that touched on


                                - 35 -
the scope of the exemption.   In that filing, the DOJ advanced the

view that the challenged conduct in a case must be "central to the

business of offering professional baseball games to the public" to

fall within the scope of the exemption.   Brief of the United States

as Amicus Curiae in Support of Neither Party at 7, Nostalgic

Partners v. Off. of the Comm'r of Baseball, 637 F. Supp. 3d 45

(S.D.N.Y. 2022) (No. 21-cv-10876).

            We do not take issue here, however, with the "central

to" formulation. We take issue only with the plaintiffs' arguments

that the conduct here falls outside the exemption because it fails

the "central to" test.   It is thus significant to us that the DOJ

does not suggest in the filing at issue that the efforts of a

professional baseball league to enforce its own rules for owning

and controlling one of its teams is merely incidental to that

business.

                                3.

            Insofar as the plaintiffs mean to make the distinct

argument that the exemption does not apply here because the alleged

conspiracy "involv[ed] the Mayor of San Juan" -- and so involved

someone who was not employed by the League -- we also are not

persuaded.    The plaintiffs' Complaint alleges that Mayor Romero

conspired with the League to "force Axon to relinquish his control

over the Cangrejeros Franchise" because Axon had criticized the

city's "repeated failure to invest in the Bithorn [stadium] and


                              - 36 -
San   Juan's    unwillingness      to    collaborate        with     the   Cangrejeros

Franchise" and because Axon had threatened to move the team to

another city.      The Complaint further alleges that the Bithorn is

"emblematic of the island's rich baseball history" and that the

stadium     conditions     affected       "players,         fans,    and      sponsors."

Moreover, the plaintiffs acknowledge that "franchise relocation

rules" are covered by the exemption.

            We do not see how the involvement of the Mayor of San

Juan -- the city that owns the Bithorn stadium -- makes the

challenged      conduct    in   this     case    any   less     "central"        to   the

operations of the League, given the evident centrality of franchise

location and a franchise's stadium to the "public display of

baseball games." In addition, the plaintiffs identify no authority

that suggests that a conspiracy by a professional baseball league's

franchise    owners    that     constitutes      the    "business        of    baseball"

necessarily ceases to constitute such "business" so long as a

single participant in the conspiracy is not a member or employee

of the league.     See Major League Baseball v. Crist, 331 F.3d 1177,

1184 (11th Cir. 2003) (rejecting argument that the involvement of

public entities in a professional baseball league's activity would

take that activity out of the scope of the exemption).

                                          D.

            Stepping      back,   we     recognize      that       the   "business     of

baseball"      exemption   has    its    origins       in    the    Supreme     Court's


                                        - 37 -
determination that professional baseball games "are purely state

affairs," Fed. Baseball, 259 U.S. at 208, for purposes of assessing

Congress's powers under the Commerce Clause.   We recognize as well

that modern Commerce Clause doctrine does not support that same

conclusion. Indeed, it offers even less support for the conclusion

that Congress's Article I powers do not extend to the sport of

baseball even though they extend to other sports.

          Nonetheless, the "business of baseball" exemption "has

survived the Court's expanding concept of interstate commerce,"

and the Court has declined to overrule the relevant precedent

despite acknowledging "that it [is] out of step with subsequent

decisions reflecting present-day concepts of interstate commerce."

Flood, 407 U.S. at 275, 282; see also id. at 286 (Douglas, J.,

dissenting) (describing the Court's 1922 view of commerce as

"narrow" and "parochial" and recognizing that "the whole concept

of commerce has changed").    We thus must apply that exemption,

which, as we have explained, is for the "business of baseball"

rather than for any specific professional baseball league.     For

the reasons we have set forth, we reject the plaintiffs' challenge

to the District Court's decision to dismiss the Sherman Act claims

based on the "business of baseball" exemption.

                               IV.

          We now turn to the plaintiffs' challenge to the District

Court's dismissal of the two claims that they brought under Puerto


                              - 38 -
Rico's antitrust law, P.R. Laws Ann. tit. 10, §§ 258, 260, and the

one claim that they brought under Puerto Rico's fair competition

law, P.R. Laws Ann. tit. 10, § 259.                 In these three claims, the

plaintiffs challenge the same conduct that provides the basis for

their two Sherman Act claims.

               In addressing these three Puerto Rico law claims, the

District Court noted that "[t]he baseball exemption bars any

federal antitrust claims issued from the complaint . . . ."                        It

then    went    on   to    conclude    that   the    claims   "are    consequently

dismissed based on the Supremacy Clause as the Supreme Court held

in Flood [that] 'state antitrust regulation would conflict with

federal policy and . . . "national uniformity (is required) in any

regulation of baseball."'"             (Quoting Flood, 407 U.S. at 284).

               The plaintiffs argue that the District Court erred in so

ruling.    The defendants defend the District Court's reasoning and

argue    that    the      "antitrust    claims   under   Puerto      Rico   law   are

preempted by the Supremacy Clause (or the Commerce Clause)."

               The defendants contend that "exempting the business of

baseball from federal antitrust law . . . does not mean it is

subject to state antitrust law."              In support of this contention,

they point out that the Supreme Court in Flood, 407 U.S. 258, and

the Eleventh Circuit in Major League Baseball v. Crist, 331 F.3d

1177, dismissed the state antitrust claims in those cases after

concluding that the "business of baseball" exemption applied. They


                                        - 39 -
also contend that the reasoning of those cases applies here because

the League is engaged in the "business of baseball."

           The defendants separately contend,        too,   that     "[t]he

Commerce Clause prohibits the application of state antitrust laws"

in professional sports generally.         (Citing Robertson v. Nat'l

Basketball Ass'n, 389 F. Supp. 867, 880 (S.D.N.Y. 1975)).             They

urge us to affirm the dismissal of these three claims on that

alternative basis as well.

           The disagreement between the parties appears to stem

primarily from their divergent views about Flood's treatment of

the state law claims at issue there.           We therefore begin by

reviewing the relevant analysis in Flood, before then explaining

why the analysis there does not support the District Court's

dismissal ruling.   Accordingly, for the reasons we will set forth,

we vacate the portion of the District Court's judgment dismissing

the   claims   brought   under   Puerto   Rico's   antitrust   and    fair

competition laws and remand for further proceedings.5


      5 The District Court appears to have held that the
applicability of the exemption deprived it of jurisdiction over
the claims brought under Puerto Rico's antitrust and fair
competition laws and to have dismissed those claims under
Rule 12(b)(1). As we have explained, however, we disagree that
the exemption presents a jurisdictional bar rather than a threshold
merits issue. See Garber, 120 F. Supp. 3d at 339; Arbaugh, 546
U.S. at 511. We thus proceed to evaluate the dismissal of these
claims under Rule 12(b)(6). See Lin, 19 F.4th at 36. For our
current review, though, it makes little practical difference for
us as we would review the applicability of the exemption to these
claims de novo under Rule 12(b)(6) or Rule 12(b)(1).


                                 - 40 -
                                    A.

          In   addressing   the    state    law     antitrust    claims,    the

Supreme Court in Flood stated:

          The   petitioner's    argument   as   to   the
          application of state antitrust laws deserves
          a word.    [The District Court] rejected the
          state law claims because state antitrust
          regulation would conflict with federal policy
          and because national "uniformity (is required)
          in any regulation of baseball and its reserved
          system." The Court of Appeals, in affirming,
          stated, "[A]s the burden on interstate
          commerce outweighs the states' interests in
          regulating baseball's reserve system, the
          Commerce Clause precludes the application here
          of state antitrust law."       As applied to
          organized baseball, and in the light of this
          Court's observations and holding in Federal
          Baseball,   in   Toolson,   in   Shubert,   in
          International Boxing, and in Radovich, and
          despite baseball's allegedly inconsistent
          position taken in the past with respect to the
          application of state law, these statements
          adequately dispose of the state law claims.
407 U.S. at 284-85 (citations omitted) (first quoting Flood v.

Kuhn, 316 F. Supp. 271, 280 (S.D.N.Y. 1970); and then quoting Flood

v. Kuhn, 443 F.2d 264, 268 (2d Cir. 1971)).

        As this passage shows, the Supreme Court in Flood favorably

quoted the conclusion that the court of appeals in that case had

reached based on its Commerce Clause analysis: "[A]s the burden on

interstate commerce outweighs the states' interests in regulating

baseball's   reserve   system,    the    Commerce    Clause     precludes   the

application here of state antitrust law."            Id. (first alteration

in original) (quoting Flood, 443 F.2d at 268).           Specifically, the



                                  - 41 -
court of appeals had explained that, with respect to the National

and American Leagues that form MLB, "each league extends over many

states,   and . . .   if    state   regulation   were   permissible,    the

internal structure of the leagues would require compliance with

the strictest state antitrust standard."         Flood, 443 F.2d at 268.

           The court of appeals in Flood further noted that "the

clubs composing the Leagues are in different cities and, for the

most part, in different states" and that "the clubs cross state

lines in order to make the [exhibitions] possible." Id. at 265-66.

And the court of appeals in Flood concluded that "[t]he consequent

extra-territorial     effect   of   necessary    compliance   [with   state

regulation] would be considerably more far-reaching than that in

Southern Pacific Co. v. Arizona," Flood, 443 F.2d at 268, which

was a case in which the Supreme Court had ruled that the extra-

territorial effects of state regulation were impermissible under

the Commerce Clause, S. Pac. Co., 325 U.S. 761, 774-75 (1945).

           That same passage from the Supreme Court's decision in

Flood also shows that the Supreme Court favorably cited to the

district court decision there.        407 U.S. at 284-85 (quoting Flood,

316 F. Supp. at 280).      The district court in Flood, like the court

of appeals in that case, had relied in relevant part on a Commerce

Clause-based theory tied to the specific nature of MLB to conclude

that the state law antitrust claims could not go forward.             316 F.

Supp. at 280.   It noted that "[s]tate and local laws may not unduly


                                    - 42 -
burden interstate commerce" and that "diverse state laws here would

seriously interfere" with MLB's national operations. Id. In doing

so, it observed that "[t]here exist no competitive professional

teams in North America outside" MLB and its minor leagues, and

that "all [teams] . . . are subject to the broad powers of the

Commissioner of Baseball."6      Id. at 273.      It further emphasized

the "single," "unified," and "nationwide" structure of "organized

baseball."   Id. at 273, 279-80.

          The   district     court   in   Flood     also   undertook   a

preemption-based analysis of the state law antitrust claims and

relied on that analysis to dismiss them.       Id. at 279.     In doing

so, it relied on the Supremacy Clause to hold that, because

Congress had occupied the field of antitrust regulation of the

"business of baseball" via the Sherman Act, the state law antitrust

claims were preempted.     Id.

          The Supreme Court in Flood, however, cited to and quoted

from only the portion of the district court's decision in that

case that addressed the dismissal of the state law claims under

the Commerce Clause.     Flood, 407 U.S. at 284 (quoting Flood, 316

F. Supp. at 280).   And, in Flood, the district court had conducted

the Commerce Clause analysis under the explicit assumption that



     6 There are no allegations in the Complaint that concern when
the League was established, but as far as we are aware, the League
predates the Flood decision.


                                 - 43 -
the "business of baseball" exemption "fail[s] to establish or

indicate a national policy regarding baseball sufficiently certain

to rise to the level of federal preemption."                  316 F. Supp. at

279-280.

                                      B.

            In contending that the District Court rightly dismissed

the three Puerto Rico law claims at issue, the defendants rely in

significant part on the Eleventh Circuit's decision in Crist. They

emphasize that Crist determined that "[a] careful reading" of the

passage quoted above from Flood "yields two different theories"

for   why   the   state   antitrust   claims     in   that    case   had   to   be

dismissed.    331 F.3d at 1185.

            Crist first concluded that the Supreme Court's reliance

in Flood on the "statement" of the district court in that case

supported "a preemption theory."           Id.   Crist then concluded that

the Supreme Court's reliance in Flood on the "statement" of the

court of appeals in that case supported a Commerce Clause-based

theory.     Id.

            Under the     "preemption theory,"        Crist concluded that

"federal antitrust policy . . . precludes the application of state

antitrust law to the business of baseball."                  Id. at 1185 n.19.

Accordingly, Crist held that the state law claims at issue there

had to be dismissed because those claims alleged violations of




                                  - 44 -
state law based on conduct that constituted the "business of

baseball."       Id. at 1185-86.

            Were we to understand Flood as Crist understood it, we

would be obliged to affirm the District Court's dismissal of the

Puerto Rico law antitrust and fair competition claims here.                  Those

three claims, like the state law antitrust claims in Crist, allege

violations of law based on conduct that constitutes the "business

of baseball."

           We do not see, however, how the "statement" from the

district court in Flood on which the Supreme Court relied in that

case supports "a preemption theory."              As our earlier analysis of

that "statement" explained, the Court there adopted the reasoning

of the lower courts that concluded that the state law antitrust

claims were prohibited under the Commerce Clause because state

regulation of conduct that would constitute the "business of

baseball" -- the MLB's enforcement of the reserve clause -- in

relation    to    an    interstate   professional     baseball    league     would

impose impermissible burdens on interstate commerce.

            Indeed, if the Court in Flood did rely on the "preemption

theory," then we see little reason for it to have referenced the

Commerce    Clause      or   to   have    embraced   an   analysis   under    that

constitutional provision, as it unmistakably did.                See Flood, 407

U.S. at 284.           In addition, the Sherman Act normally coexists

with -- rather than displaces -- state antitrust regulation, see


                                         - 45 -
California v. ARC Am. Corp., 490 U.S. 93, 101 (1989), as the

defendants acknowledge.

          True, the Supreme Court acknowledged in Flood that the

district court there also found that "state antitrust regulation

would conflict with federal policy."        407 U.S. at 284.   True, too,

the district court engaged in an analysis of field preemption.

Flood, 316 F. Supp. at 280.        But Flood quoted from and cited to

only the portion of the district court decision that addressed the

viability of the state law claims under the Commerce Clause.           407

U.S. at 284 (quoting Flood, 316 F. Supp. at 280).          So, we do not

see how the Supreme Court's reliance in Flood on the district

court's rationale in that case shows that the Supreme Court adopted

a theory of field preemption as to all claims alleging a state

antitrust law violation based on conduct that constitutes the

"business of baseball."

          We are aware that the Supreme Court in Flood dismissed

the   state   law   claims   "in    light   of   th[e   Supreme]   Court's

observations and holding in Federal Baseball, in Toolson, in

Shubert, in International Boxing, and in Radovich."         Id.    But this

feature of the Supreme Court's decision in Flood does not alter

our view that the Court based its conclusion that the state-law

antitrust claims in that case had to be dismissed based on the

Commerce Clause rather than Congress having occupied the field




                                   - 46 -
through    the       Sherman    Act    and    thereby    having       preempted    state

antitrust laws from applying to the "business of baseball."

               In referencing its "observations and holdings" in the

line of cases starting with Federal Baseball, the Supreme Court is

best    read    to    have     been    reinforcing      the    conclusion    that    the

"business of baseball" exemption does not "creat[e] a mere vacuum

in national policy, leaving the states free to regulate the

membership of the baseball leagues," Flood, 316 F. Supp. at 279

(quoting State v. Milwaukee Braves, Inc., 144 N.W.2d 1, 17-18 (Wis.

1966)).    Accordingly, to the extent that Flood invoked its Sherman

Act line of cases in rejecting the state law antitrust claims, it

appears   to     us    that    it     did   so   only   after    it    concluded    that

enforcement of state antitrust regimes as to the conduct at issue

would substantially burden interstate commerce.                       It thus appears

to have invoked that line of cases only for the purpose of

confirming that Congress had not authorized states to impose those

burdens. See S. Pac. Co., 325 U.S. at 769 ("Congress has undoubted

power    to . . . .      permit       the    states     to    regulate   [interstate]

commerce in a manner which would otherwise not be permissible

[under the Commerce Clause].").

               Of course, the Court held in                   Flood that the       state

antitrust claims there were barred because state regulation of

conduct that would constitute the "business of baseball" -- the

MLB's enforcement of the reserve clause -- in relation to an


                                            - 47 -
interstate professional baseball league would impose impermissible

burdens on interstate commerce.              It did not address the distinct

question of whether there would be any basis for prohibiting a

state law antitrust or related claim -- even if targeting conduct

that would constitute the "business of baseball" -- brought against

a   professional         baseball   league    that,   like      the    League,    has

franchises located solely within a single state or territory.7

                The   defendants    do   contend   that   the    Commerce      Clause

nonetheless "prohibits the application of state antitrust laws not

only in baseball . . . but also in other professional sports."

They rely for this contention on Robertson v. National Basketball

Association, 389 F. Supp. 867, 880 (S.D.N.Y. 1975).                         That case

concerned state antitrust claims against the National Basketball

Association ("NBA") that the district court dismissed based on

what       it   deemed    to   be   the     "unquestionably      applicable       and

controlling" court of appeals' decision in Flood.                     Id.



       "We readily acknowledge," as the court of appeals did in
       7

Flood, the tension inherent in a ruling that the "business of
baseball" exemption to federal antitrust scrutiny precludes some
state regulation.   See 443 F.2d at 268.    On the one hand, the
exemption has its roots in a determination that baseball is not
interstate commerce. Fed. Baseball, 259 U.S. at 208-09. Yet that
same exemption may now preclude some state regulation because a
state thereby may impermissibly burden interstate commerce under
the modern interpretation of the Commerce Clause. See Flood, 443
F.2d at 268 (explaining that "we are bound by [Federal Baseball],
while in our disposition of the state and common law counts, we
must of necessity decide this question . . . by present Commerce
Clause standards and not the standards applicable in 1922").


                                         - 48 -
          In following that intermediate appellate decision in

Flood, however, Robertson did not adopt a per se rule against state

antitrust regulation of sports leagues. Id. It noted that "[w]hen

Flood was decided, [MLB] had 24 teams operating in 24 'home' cities

with the teams divided into two leagues.                NBA has 18 teams

operating in 18 'home' cities, and those teams are divided into

two conferences."    Id. at 881.   It also indicated that the parties

agreed that "professional basketball involves substantial volumes

of interstate trade and commerce."         Id.

          Thus, Robertson comports with our conclusion that Flood

requires a Commerce Clause analysis of the particular league at

issue in the case.    It also comports with our conclusion that the

Commerce Clause analysis in Flood rested in significant part on

the geographic distribution of the teams involved in the league at

issue in that case.

                                    C.

          In sum, we do not agree that, because the conduct alleged

to violate Puerto Rico's antitrust and fair competition laws

constitutes the "business of baseball," it follows necessarily

that the claims under Puerto Rico antitrust and fair competition

laws must be dismissed as preempted under the Supremacy Clause.

The question remains, though, whether the application of the Puerto

Rico   antitrust    and   fair   competition     laws   to   restrain   the




                                  - 49 -
defendants' alleged conduct would impermissibly burden interstate

commerce.

            In this case, those Puerto Rico laws would be applied to

a professional baseball league that -- unlike the interstate

MLB -- has franchises that are located solely within Puerto Rico

and thus that does not "extend[] over many states," 443 F.2d at

268.   Flood, however, does not make clear whether state antitrust

regulation of a league operating within a state or territory could

be said to impose an impermissible burden on state commerce.

Accordingly, we vacate the portion of the District Court's ruling

that dismisses the Puerto Rico law antitrust and fair competition

claims and remand so that the District Court may consider whether

those claims are precluded by the Commerce Clause.               In doing so,

the District Court may consider the parties' arguments as to this

issue, as well as any issues of waiver.

                                       V.

            We also must address the plaintiffs' challenge to the

District    Court's   judgment   that       their   § 1983   claim   "must   be

dismissed    under    the   doctrine    of    res   judicata."       (Citation

modified).        With this claim, the plaintiffs allege that the

defendants, "acting in concert with the mayor of the Municipality

of San Juan, operated under the law and color of government

authority    in    depriving   [the     plaintiffs]     of   their   property

interests in the Cangrejeros Franchise without due process of law."


                                  - 50 -
As a reminder, the District Court ruled that, under Puerto Rico

law, the § 1983 claim was precluded by the prior judgment that the

San Juan Superior Court issued against Axon after he challenged

his temporary suspension from the League in that Commonwealth

Court. We agree with the plaintiffs that this ruling cannot stand.

                                   A.

          The    plaintiffs   contend,    in   part,   that   the   District

Court's ruling must be reversed because, although Puerto Rico law

requires perfect identity between the parties and between the

causes of action of the two suits for res judicata to apply, there

was not perfect identity between the two suits at issue.                 The

plaintiffs recognize that P.R. Laws Ann. tit. 31, § 3343, the law

on which the District Court relied for its res judicata analysis,

was repealed in November 2020 and so before the conduct in this

case took place.     They also recognize that, as the defendants

explain, "[t]he 2020 edition of the Puerto Rico Civil [Code],"

which by its enactment replaced and repealed § 3343, "does not

contain the requirements that existed under the 1930 Civil Code"

and that "the requirements set forth in the old Civil Code no

longer apply."

          The    plaintiffs   nonetheless      contend   that   "[i]n   the

district court, [the defendants] relied on case law applying

§ 3343" and so "cannot now renounce their position" on appeal.

They also point out that the defendants "do not identify how the


                                 - 51 -
tests for res judicata have purportedly been changed by the 2020

Puerto Rico Civil Code or what those new tests are" and "do not

cite a single case setting forth any new test."                   And, finally they

maintain    that    the   same       test   for    res    judicata    that    § 3343

required -- "the most perfect identity between the things, causes,

and    persons     of   the    litigant,"         P.R.    Laws     Ann.    tit.     31,

§ 3343 -- still "lives on in the common law."                    In support of this

contention, they point to Santiago Ruiz v. Municipio de San Juan,

No. SJ2023CV01413, 2023 WL 8615779, at *2–3 (P.R. Cir. Nov. 28,

2023); García-Navarro v. Hogar La Bella Unión, Inc., No. 3:17-cv-

01271, 2022 WL 11266460, at *33 (D.P.R. Oct. 18, 2022); and

HibiscusPR 322, LLC v. Lorenzo, No. CV 19-1854, 2021 WL 8993846,

at *8 (D.P.R. June 10, 2021).

            The plaintiffs did not themselves alert the District

Court to the fact that § 3343 was not operative at the time that

the District Court ruled on the defendants' motion to dismiss based

on that measure.        Ordinarily, we do not permit parties on appeal

to raise issues that they failed to raise below.                  See, e.g., Camara

de    Mercadeo,    Industria     y   Distribucion        de   Alimentos,     Inc.    v.

Emanuelli-Hernandez, 72 F.4th 361, 365 (1st Cir. 2023).                      However,

the defendants do not identify the plaintiffs' failure to point

out to the District Court that § 3343 was no longer the law as a

ground for affirming the District Court's ruling. To the contrary,

they concede that the measure in question was not operative at the


                                       - 52 -
time of the District Court's ruling, and they make no argument

that, under § 3343, the District Court correctly concluded that

res judicata applied.

          In addition, it is not evident that the District Court

did correctly apply § 3343.    As the plaintiffs point out, neither

the parties nor the cause of action were identical between the

prior suit and this suit, and § 3343 appears to require "perfect

identity" in those elements across the two cases.        P.R. Laws Ann.

tit. 31, § 3343.

          In such circumstances, we see no reason to let the

District Court's ruling stand based on a statute that it is agreed

by both parties was not operative at the time that the District

Court relied on it and that the District Court appears to have

misapplied in any event.       We thus cannot affirm the District

Court's ruling insofar as it rests on § 3343.

                                  B.

          Seemingly cognizant of the difficulties presented by

dismissing the § 1983 claims based on § 3343, the defendants urge

us to affirm the District Court's judgment on alternative grounds,

as we may, see Brox, 83 F.4th at 98.       Neither alternative ground

has merit.

                                  1.

          The   defendants    first    contend   that   the   plaintiffs

forfeited their challenge to the District Court's ruling that


                                - 53 -
determined that the § 1983 claim was precluded by failing to raise

it below.    They acknowledge that the plaintiffs did argue "that

res judicata does not bar the present action," but they contend

this argument related to the case as a whole and not to the § 1983

claim specifically.     We are not persuaded.

            It is unsurprising that the plaintiffs responded to the

defendants' motion to dismiss on grounds of res judicata in the

categorical fashion that they did.             The defendants themselves

contended to the District Court only that the entire action was

barred on res judicata grounds, and they did so without making any

more particularized assertion about the § 1983 claim.

            In any event, the plaintiffs did assert the argument

that they now advance about the parties and causes of actions not

being identical between the current and prior suits. Specifically,

they argued to the District Court, among other things, that the

"[p]laintiffs' claims do not share a perfect identity of thing or

cause with the prior state court action" and that the "plaintiffs'

claims do not share a perfect identity of parties with those in

the Superior Court action."      (Citation modified).

                                      2.

            The   defendants   also   assert   that   we   may   affirm   the

District Court's ruling dismissing the § 1983 claim on grounds of

issue preclusion, even if res judicata does not apply.              But the

defendants did not assert this ground for dismissing the claims


                                  - 54 -
below, so we decline to consider it now.                   See In re Fin. Oversight

&    Mgmt.    Bd.,   16    F.4th   954,      962    (1st   Cir.   2021)     ("It   is   a

well-settled principle in this circuit that a party may not raise

on appeal issues that were not seasonably advanced (and, hence,

preserved) below." (citation modified) (quoting Toren v. Toren,

191 F.3d 23, 29 (1st Cir. 1999)).

                                             3.

              In sum, the sole ground that the District Court gave for

dismissing the plaintiffs' § 1983 claim is the sole one that the

defendants advanced but that they themselves no longer defend.

That ground rests, however, on a law that was not operative at the

time that the District Court relied on it to dismiss the claim.

Accordingly, we reverse the District Court's dismissal of the

plaintiffs' § 1983 claim.

                                             VI.

              In consequence of our ruling as to the § 1983 claim, a

federal claim remains in the plaintiffs' case.                     The authority of

the District Court to dismiss the remaining Puerto Rico law claim,

however, kicks in only if all federal claims have been dismissed,

at    least    given      that   none   of    the    other    bases   for    dismissal

identified in 28 U.S.C. § 1367(c) are presented on appeal as

grounds for affirming that claim's dismissal.                         See 28 U.S.C.

§ 1367(c).      We thus reverse the District Court's dismissal of the

remaining Puerto Rico law claim as well.


                                        - 55 -
                                    VII.

           For   the   foregoing    reasons,   we   affirm    the   District

Court's grant of the motion to dismiss with regard to the federal

antitrust claims.      We vacate the District Court's grant of the

motion to dismiss with regard to the claims brought under Puerto

Rico's   antitrust and fair competition laws.            We    reverse   the

District Court's grant of the motion to dismiss with regard to the

claim brought under the federal civil rights statute.               We also

reverse the District Court's dismissal of the remaining claim

brought under Puerto Rico law.        The parties shall bear their own

costs.




                                   - 56 -