21-800
Coleman v. Grand


                         United States Court of Appeals
                            For the Second Circuit

                                         August Term 2021

                                     Argued: May 13, 2022
                                   Decided: November 3, 2025

                                             No. 21-800



                                   STEVEN DOUGLAS COLEMAN,

                                         Plaintiff-Appellant,

                                                   v.

                                        MARIA KIM GRAND,

                                        Defendant-Appellee. ∗



                         Appeal from the United States District Court
                            for the Eastern District of New York
                           No. 18-cv-5663, Eric N. Vitaliano, Judge.



          Before: CHIN, SULLIVAN, and MENASHI, Circuit Judges.

      Plaintiff-Appellant Steven Douglas Coleman, a prominent jazz saxophonist,
appeals from the district court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of his former
pupil, Defendant-Appellee Maria Kim Grand, on Coleman’s claim that Grand
defamed him under New York law when she accused him of sexual harassment.
Coleman’s claim centers on a seven-page, single-spaced letter that Grand

∗
    The Clerk of Court is respectfully directed to amend the official case caption as set forth above.
circulated to a select group of friends and colleagues in the wake of the #MeToo
movement, which described the complicated sexual relationship she had with
Coleman from 2011 to 2016. After the parties cross-moved for summary judgment,
the district court (Vitaliano, J.) dismissed Coleman’s defamation claim, concluding
that he failed to offer facts from which a reasonable jury could conclude that Grand
acted with actual malice in making certain statements in her letter and that her
letter did not contain actionable, demonstrably false statements.
       On appeal, Coleman argues that the district court (1) erred in its application
of New York law, (2) erroneously determined that there was no genuine issue of
material fact as to whether Grand acted with actual malice, and (3) incorrectly
concluded that the allegedly defamatory statements in Grand’s letter were non-
actionable statements of opinion rather than fact. Because we agree with the
district court that Coleman challenges only non-actionable statements of opinion,
and not the disclosed facts on which those opinions were based, we AFFIRM the
judgment of the district court.

      Judge Menashi dissents in a separate opinion.

      AFFIRMED.

                                GIEL STEIN (Steven M. Richman, Elizabeth Griffin,
                                on the brief), Clark Hill PLC, New York, NY, for
                                Plaintiff-Appellant.

                                MARK I. BAILEN (Katherine L. McKnight, Richard
                                B. Raile, Baker & Hostetler LLP, Washington, DC;
                                A. Mackenna White, Lewis Baach Kaufmann
                                Middlemiss PLLC, New York, NY, on the brief),
                                Baker & Hostetler LLP, Washington, DC, for
                                Defendant-Appellee.

                                Jared K. Carter, Cornell Law School First
                                Amendment Clinic, Ithaca, NY, for Amicus Curiae
                                Michael Balter in support of Defendant-Appellee.

                                Katie Townsend, Bruce D. Brown, Reporters
                                Committee for Freedom of the Press, Washington,


                                         2
                                DC, for Amici Curiae The Reporters Committee for
                                Freedom of the Press and 30 Media Organizations in
                                support of Defendant-Appellee.

RICHARD J. SULLIVAN, Circuit Judge:

      Steven Douglas Coleman, a prominent jazz saxophonist, appeals from the

district court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of his former pupil, Maria Kim

Grand, on Coleman’s claim that Grand defamed him under New York law when

she accused him of sexual harassment. Coleman’s claim centers on a seven-page,

single-spaced letter that Grand circulated to a select group of friends and

colleagues in the wake of the #MeToo movement, which described the complicated

sexual relationship she had with Coleman from 2011 to 2016. After the parties

cross-moved for summary judgment, the district court dismissed Coleman’s

defamation claim, concluding that he failed to offer facts from which a reasonable

jury could conclude that Grand acted with actual malice in making certain

statements in her letter and that her letter did not contain actionable, demonstrably

false statements.

      On appeal, Coleman argues that the district court (1) erred in its application

of New York law, (2) erroneously determined that there was no genuine issue of

material fact as to whether Grand acted with actual malice, and (3) incorrectly




                                          3
concluded that the allegedly defamatory statements in Grand’s letter were non-

actionable statements of opinion rather than fact. 1 Because we agree with the

district court that Coleman challenges only non-actionable statements of opinion,

and not the disclosed facts on which those opinions were based, we affirm the

district court’s judgment.

                                     I. BACKGROUND

       In November 2017, Grand emailed a letter to approximately forty of her

friends and colleagues in the music industry, claiming that she had an intermittent

quid pro quo sexual relationship with Coleman between 2011 and 2016. Grand

asserted that during this period Coleman – a prominent musician who was thirty-

five years her senior – sexually harassed her and pressured her to have a sexual

relationship with him in exchange for his training and mentorship as she

commenced her own career as a saxophonist. In particular, the letter asserted that

Coleman routinely “pressure[d]” her to be “intimate with him” when he was




1 After oral argument, Grand submitted a letter pursuant to Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure
28(j) notifying the Court that the New York Court of Appeals had granted argument to consider
whether the 2020 amendments to a New York statute proscribing strategic lawsuits against public
participation, also known as New York’s anti-SLAPP statute, apply retroactively. [Doc. No. 163.]
Based on representations that the New York Court of Appeals ruling could be relevant to the
issues on appeal, we reserved our decision until after the New York Court of Appeals resolved
the retroactivity issue. See Gottwald v. Sebert, 40 N.Y.3d 240 (2023) (holding that the 2020
amendments do not apply retroactively).


                                               4
teaching her, “made” her share hotel rooms with him when they traveled for work,

“relentlessly ask[ed] [her] to have sex with him” and “g[o]t really angry” when

she refused, offered her work and training opportunities in exchange for sex,

“would call [her] in the middle of the night and never take no for an answer,” and

on one occasion got into bed with her and kissed her when she was asleep despite

her explicitly telling him that she did not want to sleep with him. J. App’x at 38–

40.

      In recognition of the fact that her letter painted Coleman in an unfavorable

light, Grand chose to refer to him as “X” throughout the letter “in order to protect

[her]self from any legal repercussions.” Id. at 36. And in her email circulating the

letter, Grand specifically noted that she did not intend for it to be made “public”

at that time because it was “legally dangerous for [her] to publish [it].” Id. at 176.

      In her letter, Grand acknowledged that she contributed to the unhealthy

relationship and explicitly admitted that she did not “intend to cast [her]self as

only a victim of the situation.”     Id. at 36.   She acknowledged that she was

“manipulative” towards Coleman because she “didn’t want his attention to stop,”

id. at 37; that she “fell in love with him” and “craved his attention” during the

times they were broken up, id. at 38; that she continued to “admire [Coleman] and




                                          5
respect him immensely as a musician and an elder,” id. at 41; and that she was

“eternally grateful” to Coleman for teaching her and “value[d] the work” she did

with him, id. at 42.     Grand conceded that she had “agree[d] to sleep with

[Coleman]” when such encounters occurred and at no point did she suggest that

Coleman had physically coerced her to have sex with him. Id. at 38; see also id.

(“[H]e convinced me to be intimate with him.” (emphasis added)).

      Grand explained that she ultimately decided to write and circulate the letter

in order to “speak up about the way sexism has affected [her],” to increase

“[a]wareness,” and to contribute to the “conversation” sparked by the #MeToo

movement. Id. at 36; see also id. at 176 (explaining, in an email, that the letter’s goal

was to start “a larger conversation about what’s acceptable and what’s not”).

Grand framed the letter as a personal account of her “experience” with “sexism in

the music industry.” Id. at 176.

      In October 2018, Coleman filed a complaint alleging that Grand’s letter was

defamatory. In his subsequent motion for summary judgment, Coleman argued

that four statements in Grand’s letter were provably false – namely, Grand’s

statements that (1) when she moved to New York in 2011, Coleman “convinced

[her] to be intimate with him”; (2) she was “sexually harassed” within a




                                           6
“professional relationship”; (3) the sexual harassment began in September 2013,

when she “wasn’t in love with him anymore” and “didn’t want to be intimate with

him anymore”; and (4) Coleman often “call[ed] [her] in the middle of the night

and [would] never take no for an answer.” Id. at 142–46 (emphasis and internal

quotation marks omitted). Grand filed a cross-motion for summary judgment,

arguing – among other things – that her letter constituted a non-actionable

statement of opinion and that the content of the letter was substantially true.

Coleman then filed an opposition to Grand’s cross-motion for summary judgment,

arguing that Grand’s letter also falsely insinuated that she was “forced to go to

[Coleman’s] hotel room” during a 2011 trip to Chicago. Id. at 2074 (Coleman’s

summary judgment opposition brief).

       The district court granted summary judgment in favor of Grand on

Coleman’s defamation claim, finding that Coleman failed to offer facts from which

a reasonable jury could conclude, by clear and convincing evidence, that Grand

acted with actual malice in publishing her statements, and, alternatively, that the

challenged statements were protected opinions rather than falsifiable facts. 2 The

district court characterized Grand’s letter as “describing her subjective



2The district court also granted Coleman’s motion for summary judgment on Grand’s defamation
and intentional infliction of emotional distress counterclaims, which Grand does not appeal.


                                             7
experience” and “sharing personal opinions on a difficult relationship and related

societal issues,” thereby constituting a statement of “opinion supported by

disclosed facts.” Sp. App’x at 23. Coleman now appeals, arguing that the district

court erred in its application of the actual-malice standard and in finding that

Grand’s statements were non-actionable opinions as a matter of law.

                                   II. DISCUSSION

      We review a district court’s legal conclusions and grant of summary

judgment de novo, see Shakhnes v. Berlin, 689 F.3d 244, 250 (2d Cir. 2012),

“construing all facts in favor of the nonmoving party,” In re Sept. 11 Litig., 802 F.3d

314, 328 (2d Cir. 2015). “Whether particular words are defamatory presents a legal

question to be resolved by the courts in the first instance.” Celle v. Filipino Rep.

Enters. Inc., 209 F.3d 163, 177 (2d Cir. 2000) (alterations adopted and internal

quotation marks omitted). The parties agree that New York law governs the

determination of whether Grand’s statements constitute facts or opinions and

have consented to its application in resolving this issue.          See id. at 175–76

(explaining that when “no party has challenged the choice of New York libel law,

all are deemed to have consented to its application”).




                                          8
      To prevail on a defamation claim under New York law, a plaintiff must

prove that the defendant made “a false statement, published without privilege or

authorization to a third party,” that “either cause[s] special harm or constitute[s]

defamation per se.” Dillon v. City of New York, 704 N.Y.S.2d 1, 5 (App. Div. 1st Dep’t

1999). New York recognizes only four types of per se defamation, none of which

applies here: statements that (1) “imput[e] unchastity to a woman”; (2) assert that

a plaintiff has a “loathsome disease”; (3) tend to injure a plaintiff in his profession

by reflecting on his ability to perform or properly conduct his business; and (4)

charge a plaintiff with a serious crime. Liberman v. Gelstein, 80 N.Y.2d 429, 435

(1992); see Harris v. Hirsh, 643 N.Y.S.2d 556, 559 (App. Div. 1st Dep’t 1996)

(explaining that injuries to the plaintiff in his profession are “limited” to

statements “made with reference to a matter of significance and importance” to

the plaintiff’s professional conduct rather than “a more general reflection [of] the

plaintiff’s character or qualities” (internal quotation marks omitted)). Otherwise,

a defamatory statement must cause actual and special harm by exposing an

individual “to public hatred, shame, obloquy, contumely, odium, contempt,

ridicule, aversion, ostracism, degradation, or disgrace,” or by “induc[ing] an evil

opinion of one in the minds of right-thinking persons.” Celle, 209 F.3d at 177




                                          9
(internal quotation marks omitted). To be actionable, “the statement must do more

than cause discomfort or affront; [a] statement is measured not by the sensitivities

of the maligned, but the critique of reasonable minds that would think the speech

attributes odious or despicable characterizations to its subject.” Chau v. Lewis, 771

F.3d 118, 127 (2d Cir. 2014). It must also be evaluated “in the context of the. . .

publication as a whole, tested against the understanding of the average reader,

and if not reasonably susceptible of a defamatory meaning, [it is] not actionable

and cannot be made so by a strained or artificial construction.” Dillon, 704

N.Y.S.2d at 5.

      It is well established that pure opinions, “no matter how offensive, cannot

be the subject of an action for defamation.” Davis v. Boeheim, 24 N.Y.3d 262, 269

(2014) (internal quotation marks omitted); see Thomas H. v. Paul B., 18 N.Y.3d 580,

584 (2012) (explaining that “only statements of fact can be defamatory because

statements of pure opinion cannot be proven untrue”). Under New York law, such

opinions come in two forms: (1) “a statement of opinion which is accompanied by

a recitation of the facts upon which it is based”; and (2) “an opinion not

accompanied by such a factual recitation so long as it does not imply that it is based

upon undisclosed facts.” Davis, 24 N.Y.3d at 269 (alternation adopted and internal




                                         10
quotation marks omitted). In both scenarios, the statement of opinion would not

be actionable as defamation because a reasonable reader would not view the

opinion as a distinct factual assertion, but instead as the speaker’s personal

assessment of known facts. Thus, “the reader has the opportunity to assess the

basis upon which the opinion was reached in order to draw the reader’s own

conclusions concerning its validity.” Id. (alteration adopted and internal quotation

marks omitted). For an opinion statement like this, “we depend for its correction

not on the conscience of judges and juries but on the competition of other ideas.”

Id. (internal quotation marks omitted).

      The dispositive question is therefore “whether a reasonable reader could

have concluded that the [statements] were conveying facts about the plaintiff.”

Gross v. N.Y. Times Co., 82 N.Y.2d 146, 152 (1993) (alterations adopted and internal

quotation marks omitted). In making this determination, courts must consider:

“(1) whether the specific language in issue has a precise meaning which is readily

understood; (2) whether the statements are capable of being proven true or false;

and (3) whether either the full context of the communication . . . or the broader

social context and surrounding circumstances are such as to signal readers . . . that

what is being read . . . is likely to be opinion, not fact.” Davis, 24 N.Y.3d at 270




                                          11
(alterations adopted and internal quotation marks omitted). When evaluating

these factors, courts are to adopt a “holistic approach” that accounts for “the

content of the communication as a whole, its tone[,] and apparent purpose.” Id.

And as explained above, “a statement of opinion that is accompanied by a

recitation of the facts on which it is based or one that does not imply the existence

of undisclosed underlying facts” is not actionable because it “is readily understood

by the audience as conjecture.” Gross, 82 N.Y.2d at 153–54.

      Under these principles, we agree with the district court’s characterization of

the challenged statements in Grand’s letter as being statements of “opinion

supported by disclosed facts.” Sp. App’x at 23. Grand’s seven-page, single-spaced

letter explained at the outset that its purpose was to tell a “more complete story”

about the “emotional abuse” and “sexual[] harass[ment]” that Grand believes she

suffered in her relationship with Coleman. J. App’x at 36. The letter narrates, in

great detail, facts regarding Grand and Coleman’s relationship that are capable of

being proven true or false, leaving readers free to determine for themselves

whether Grand’s belief that she was sexually harassed is a fair assessment of the

information provided. See Gross, 82 N.Y.2d at 153–54 (explaining that opinion

statements that rely on undisclosed facts are actionable, while opinion statements




                                         12
that rely on disclosed facts generally are not). Grand also wrote that her letter

aimed to get “everything off [her] chest” such that she would not “have anything

to hide,” making clear that her views were not based on any undisclosed facts. J.

App’x at 36. Thus, reasonable readers could only have understood Grand’s

assessment that Coleman sexually harassed her (and similar statements of

opinion) as Grand’s personal characterization of the facts set forth in the letter,

rather than as a distinct assertion of fact.

       Accordingly, we agree with the district court that the specific statements

identified by Coleman are not actionable defamation. 3 We address them in turn.

       A.      Grand’s Statement that Coleman “Convinced” Her to Be Intimate

       Coleman first challenges Grand’s statement that “[a]bout 6 months after

[she] moved to N[ew] Y[ork] in 2011, he convinced [her] to be intimate with him.”

Id. at 142 (emphasis and internal quotation marks omitted). Coleman argues that

this statement implies that he “pressured or otherwise unscrupulously prevailed

upon” Grand, which he maintains is false because Grand agreed that she initially


3 In his brief on appeal, Coleman identifies certain additional statements in Grand’s letter that he
claims are defamatory because they referenced “sexual harassment” and claimed that “sexual
relations were forced upon her in exchange for professional benefit.” Coleman Br. at 8–9. Because
Coleman did not identify these statements as false or defamatory in his submissions in the district
court, we decline to consider his contentions regarding these additional statements here. See
Radwan v. Manuel, 55 F.4th 101, 123 n.13 (2d Cir. 2022) (declining to consider argument “because
it was not raised before the district court”).


                                                13
approached him, acknowledged that Coleman never forced her to have sex,

indicated that she had once come into his room, and told her then boyfriend that

she wanted to experiment with Coleman. Id. at 1395.

      For starters, the assertion that Coleman “convinced [Grand] to be intimate

with him,” id. at 38, is not sufficiently specific or defamatory to support a claim

under New York defamation law. New York law is clear that a statement must do

more than cause discomfort or affront, Chau, 771 F.3d at 127, and nothing about

the assertion that Coleman “convinced [Grand] to be intimate with him,” J. App’x

at 38, can be said to expose Coleman “to public hatred, shame, obloquy,

contumely, odium, contempt, ridicule, aversion, ostracism, degradation, or

disgrace, or . . . induce[] an evil opinion of [him] in the minds of right-thinking

persons,” Celle, 209 F.3d at 177. The mere assertion that Coleman convinced Grand

to do something against her better judgment, and to her regret, is not enough to

constitute actionable defamation.

      Moreover, such a statement “would clearly be understood by a reasonable

[reader] to be a figurative expression of how [Grand] felt,” making it a non-

actionable statement of opinion. Springer v. Almontaser, 904 N.Y.S.2d 765, 767

(App. Div. 2d Dep’t 2010). Indeed, the plain meaning of the word “convince”




                                        14
reflects that Grand was merely explaining how she internally felt, i.e., that she was

ultimately persuaded by Coleman. See Convince, New Oxford Dictionary (3d ed.

2010) (defining “convince” as “persuade (someone) to do something”).

      This conclusion becomes even clearer when Grand’s statement is viewed in

the context of the seven-page, single-spaced letter as a whole. See Gross, 82 N.Y.2d

at 155 (explaining that statements are to be evaluated in light of the context in

which they are used). In the part of the letter that precedes the statement about

how Coleman convinced Grand to be intimate with him, Grand repeatedly

expresses how she “felt” in response to Coleman’s various actions. See, e.g., J.

App’x at 36 (“He . . . made me feel intrigued, flattered, fascinated, and also

afraid.”); id. at 37 (“I felt strong attraction to who he was and what he could do.

But I was not craving an intimate affair with him.”); id. (“I was confused, flattered,

and maybe slightly manipulative, to be honest.”); id. (“I didn’t want his attention

to stop.”); id. (“I kept thinking. And wondering. And feeling angry but also

confused by what he had said.”). The subjectiveness of Grand’s feelings continues

throughout the letter and underscores the conclusion that she was expressing an

opinion as to the propriety of Coleman’s conduct during their relationship. See,

e.g., id. at 38 (“I fell in love with him, and I felt that I needed him in my life in order




                                            15
to survive, to learn, to thrive, and to become a professional musician.”); id. (“I was

too hooked; I felt that I was useless without him and that I had no direction . . . .”);

id. (“I felt (and still feel) that in some levels he knows me better than anyone else

does.”). But whether Coleman was a good or bad partner is precisely the sort of

opinion statement that cannot be objectively proven and is therefore not an

actionable basis for a defamation claim.

      In short, the language that Coleman contests – Grand’s statement that

Coleman convinced her to be intimate with him – is surrounded by a litany of

statements about Grand’s subjective feelings throughout their relationship and

various disclosed facts.     No reasonable reader could conclude that such a

statement, in context, is anything more than a non-actionable “statement of

opinion which is accompanied by a recitation of the facts upon which it is based.”

Steinhilber v. Alphonse, 68 N.Y.2d 283, 289 (1986).

      B.     Characterization of Coleman’s Conduct as Sexual Harassment

      Coleman next takes issue with Grand’s statement that she “was sexually

harassed inside a professional relationship.” J. App’x at 143 (internal quotation

marks omitted). Coleman contends that this statement is provably false because

Grand herself admitted that she “manipulated [him] to gain [a] professional




                                           16
advantage.” Id. at 1395. But Coleman again takes this statement out of context,

and no reasonable reader would interpret Grand’s statement that she was sexually

harassed to be anything more than a statement of her opinion about the propriety

of Coleman’s actions as described in her letter. See Gross, 82 N.Y.2d at 152.

      Whether conduct rises to the level of harassment – and what is meant by the

term – is often a subjective inquiry that permits differing opinions among those

involved in, or aware of, the alleged conduct. For this reason, some New York

courts have determined that allegations of harassment are not defamatory because

of the imprecision of the term. See Springer, 904 N.Y.S.2d at 767 (holding that a

defendant’s statement that she was “harassed was not an actionable statement of

objective fact because it did not have a precise, readily understood meaning”); see

also Jacobus v. Trump, 51 N.Y.S.3d 330, 338 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 2017) (endorsing Springer’s

holding that the term “‘harassed’ had no precise, readily understood meaning”),

aff’d, 64 N.Y.S.3d 889 (App. Div. 1st Dep’t 2017).

      To be sure, an accusation of sexual harassment or similar misconduct can,

in certain circumstances, be defamatory. For instance, a defendant’s claim to “hold

information” showing that the plaintiff “subjected” a woman to “sexual

harassment” plainly communicates that the speaker possesses undisclosed facts




                                         17
casting the plaintiff in a defamatory light. Alianza Dominicana, Inc. v. Luna, 645

N.Y.S.2d 28, 30 (App. Div. 1st Dep’t 1996).         And specific accusations of

“inappropriate personal gifts,” “flirtatious comments,” and “unwanted physical

contact” would likewise have a readily understood defamatory meaning.

Chiavarelli v. Williams, 681 N.Y.S.2d 276, 277 (App. Div. 1st Dep’t 1998). But New

York law is clear that the “difficult task” of determining whether an accusation of

misconduct constitutes an expression of fact or of opinion requires a case-by-case

inquiry. Alianza Dominicana, Inc., 645 N.Y.S.2d at 30 (internal quotation marks

omitted).

      Here, Grand provided the factual basis for her conclusion that Coleman

sexually harassed her. For instance, Grand’s letter states that Coleman would

“take [Grand] to the park and practice, take [her] to meet some older musicians,

take [her] out to dinner, and then get really angry when [she] would refuse to have

sex.” J. App’x at 39. The letter also recounts an incident where Coleman took

photographs of Grand while she was sleeping, id. at 37, and states that Grand once

woke up to Coleman “half-naked, kissing [her] on the lips,” id. at 40. The letter

further notes that Coleman once told her on tour that she “owed him a ‘lifetime of

p[*]ssy’ for what he had taught [her]” and mentions a time where Grand texted




                                        18
Coleman that she was suicidal, and he simply responded that “he looked forward

to [her] breaking down so that [she] would come to him.” Id. at 39. Grand’s letter

nonetheless acknowledges that Coleman broke up with her in 2013, and that she

then “would desperately try to engage him, so as not to lose [his] mentorship and

[her] professional relationship with him.” Id. at 38–39. Thus, Grand supplied the

factual context on which she based her assessment, as opposed to merely asserting

that she was sexually harassed and thus implying the existence of undisclosed

underlying facts. See Gross, 82 N.Y.2d at 153–54.

      Critically, Coleman does not dispute those facts as such.        He instead

challenges Grand’s conclusion that the conduct described in her letter constituted

sexual harassment. But ultimately, that conclusion is a subjective one – or a legal

one – and it is for the reasonable reader to make up his or her own mind as to

whether the undisputed facts disclosed in Grand’s letter are properly considered

sexual harassment.    See Gross, 82 N.Y.2d at 154; see, e.g., Melius v. Glacken,

943 N.Y.S.2d 134, 136 (App. Div. 2d Dep’t 2012) (holding that the defendant’s

characterization of the plaintiff as “an ‘extortionist’ who was seeking ‘to extort

money’” was a non-actionable expression of opinion where it was based on

unchallenged, disclosed facts).




                                        19
      In short, Grand’s statements, in context, reflect her opinion about Coleman’s

conduct based on a recitation of supporting facts that Coleman has not disputed.

And as explained above, “a statement of opinion that is accompanied by a

recitation of the facts on which it is based” is not actionable. Gross, 82 N.Y.2d at

153–54.

      C.    Grand’s Statements About the Timing of the “Harassment”

      Coleman next argues that Grand defamed him when she wrote: “By . . .

Sept[ember] 2013, I wasn’t in love with him anymore. I didn’t want to be intimate

with him anymore. That period is when the sexual harassment started.” J. App’x

at 144 (alterations adopted and internal quotation marks omitted). Coleman

argues that this statement was “possibly the most damaging statement” in the

letter because it “effectively accuse[d] [him] of three years of workplace sexual

harassment.” Id. at 1396. According to Coleman, this statement is demonstrably

false because (1) it was he, not Grand, who ended their relationship; (2) Grand

continued to contact him often; (3) Grand still initiated sexual encounters with

him; and (4) Grand expressed that she loved him and was frustrated that he did

not care about her in the same way. See id. at 1396–97.




                                         20
      Grand’s statements that she no longer loved Coleman or wanted to be

intimate with him – even if such statements could be proven false – simply do not

expose Coleman “to public hatred, shame, obloquy, contumely, odium, contempt,

ridicule, aversion, ostracism, degradation, or disgrace, or . . . induce[] an evil

opinion of [him] in the minds of right-thinking persons.” Celle, 209 F.3d at 177

(internal quotation marks omitted). Because those statements could not possibly

“do more than cause discomfort or affront,” they are not actionable. Chau, 771 F.3d

at 127. In any event, Grand conceded in her letter that she “would desperately try

to engage [Coleman] so as not to lose [his] mentorship” and continued to “play[]

into his game” by agreeing to sleep with him. J. App’x at 39. Grand also

forthrightly acknowledged that “[Coleman] broke up with [her]” and even told

her not to “bother[]” him anymore. Id. at 38.

      Grand’s statement about workplace sexual harassment, meanwhile, is not

actionable for the same reason as the prior statements about Coleman sexually

harassing her. That is, a reasonable reader would clearly recognize Grand’s

statement that Coleman sexually harassed her to be her subjective assessment of

disclosed facts regarding a complicated (and at times co-dependent) relationship.

See Gross, 82 N.Y.2d at 153–54.




                                        21
        D.    Statements About Coleman’s “Never Tak[ing] No for an Answer”

        Coleman also objects to Grand’s statement that “[h]e would call [her] in the

middle of the night and never take no for an answer.” J. App’x at 145 (internal

quotation marks omitted). Coleman argues that this statement implies that he was

calling Grand to request sex, and “during her deposition, [she] could not identify

a time when [he] initiated intimacy and refused to take ‘no’ for an answer.” Id. at

1397.    Coleman further asserts that this statement is false because he never

physically forced Grand to have sex, as Grand herself admitted. See id. at 1398.

        At no point, however, does Grand’s letter represent or imply that she was

raped or otherwise physically forced to have sex with Coleman. And Coleman

does not deny that he called Grand in the middle of the night; he merely disputes

her characterization of his – and her – state of mind when he did so. But whether

Grand correctly characterized Coleman’s state of mind is of no moment, since the

statement is clearly about how Grand subjectively perceived Coleman’s requests.

See, e.g., Jacobus, 51 N.Y.S.3d at 342 (explaining that the defendant’s

“characterization of plaintiff as having ‘begged’” was a “loose, figurative, and

hyperbolic reference to plaintiff’s state of mind and [wa]s therefore[] not

susceptible of objective verification”). Once again, considering the challenged




                                         22
statement in the context of the entire letter, a reasonable reader would view it as a

statement of Grand’s subjective perception of Coleman’s persistence, precisely the

sort of opinion statement that is not actionable under New York’s defamation

laws. See Gross, 82 N.Y.2d at 152.

      E.     The Implication that Grand Was “Forced to Go” to Coleman’s Room

      Finally, Coleman argues that Grand falsely insinuated that she was “forced

to go to his hotel room” during a 2011 workshop in Chicago when, in fact, she (1)

“affirmed in a July[] 2011 email that she didn’t mind staying in the same room” as

him and that they booked the room together, J. App’x at 2074, (2) “testified in her

deposition that Coleman never physically forced her” to go to his hotel room, id. at

2073, and (3) later admitted that “she had lied to her mother about being forced to

have sex with him on that trip,” id. at 2074.

      But Coleman, once again, takes Grand’s statements out of context. Grand’s

own letter acknowledges that she “agreed” to share the room with Coleman before

traveling, thereby undermining the interpretation advanced by Coleman. Id. at 40;

see Dillon, 704 N.Y.S.2d at 5 (stressing that “words must be construed in the context

of the entire statement or publication as a whole, tested against the understanding

of the average reader”). Nothing in the letter, moreover, implies that Coleman




                                         23
physically forced Grand into staying with him in Chicago. Rather, in context, the

letter leads a reasonable reader to conclude that Grand felt she had to sleep with

Coleman in order to attend the workshop. See Gross, 82 N.Y.2d at 152. She may

have been wrong about that, but in context, that statement simply reflected

Grand’s assessment of the facts disclosed in her letter.

                                     III. DISSENT

      Resisting this straightforward application of New York law, the dissent

misunderstands our analysis, mischaracterizes the claim that Coleman actually

brought, and misapplies New York’s distinction between (actionable) statements

of fact and (non-actionable) statements of opinion.

      Although the dissent insists otherwise, nobody disputes that Grand’s letter

made “factual claims” that are “either true or false.” Dissent at 2; see, e.g., supra at

12–13 (agreeing that Grand’s letter includes “facts regarding Grand and Coleman’s

relationship that are capable of being proven true or false”); see also Sp. App’x at

23 (district court characterizing Grand’s letter as consisting of statements of

“opinion supported by disclosed facts”); Grand Br. at 48 (acknowledging that

Grand’s letter “does state facts” and “present[s] . . . factual content”). But under

New York’s strict standard for pleading and proving defamation, we must focus




                                          24
our analysis on the precise statements that Coleman – not the dissent – identifies as

defamatory. See Gross, 82 N.Y.2d at 153 (“In [New York] the inquiry, which must

be made by the court, entails an examination of the challenged statements with a

view toward . . . whether the specific language in issue has a precise meaning which

is readily understood . . . [and] capable of being proven true or false.” (internal

citations omitted and emphases added)). And as we have explained, Coleman

does not challenge the Grand letter’s factual content – such as its assertion that

Coleman told Grand that she “owed him a ‘lifetime of p[*]ssy’ for what he had

taught [her],” Dissent at 1 (quoting J. App’x at 39) – but only Grand’s subjective

characterization of those facts as sexual harassment.

      The dissent nevertheless insists that Grand’s use of the label “sexual

harassment” to describe her relationship with Coleman is defamatory. Dissent at

5–7. Yet Grand’s letter made clear that her characterization of Coleman’s conduct

as sexual harassment was her personal assessment of the specific facts alleged in

her letter, and nothing more. See App’x at 36 (expressing Grand’s belief that the

facts detailed in her letter amounted to “sexual[] harass[ment]” and stating that

the purpose of the letter was to “provide a more complete story” and “get

everything off [her] chest”). Thus, a reasonable reader would not have perceived




                                         25
Grand’s use of the label “sexual harassment” as a distinct factual assertion or as

implying the existence of undisclosed facts, but rather as a “proffered hypothesis”

based on the detailed “recitation of . . . facts” in her letter. Gross, 82 N.Y.2d at 154.

Under New York law, “this class of statements provides a clear illustration of

situations in which the full context of the communication signals readers or

listeners that what is being read or heard is likely to be opinion, not fact.” Id.

(alterations adopted and internal quotation marks omitted).

      The dissent’s arguments to the contrary are unpersuasive. For starters, the

dissent’s attempt to analogize this case to our Title VII hostile-environment

jurisprudence shows (if anything) why Grand’s characterization of Coleman’s

conduct as “sexual harassment” should not be treated as a distinct factual

assertion.   In the Title VII context, what matters are the facts underlying a

harassment claim – not the plaintiff’s use of that label. See, e.g., Schwapp v. Town of

Avon, 118 F.3d 106, 111 (2d Cir. 1997) (disregarding the “legal conclusion[]” that

the plaintiff “was working in a hostile or abusive working environment” (internal

quotation marks omitted)); Davis v. Carty, No. 24-cv-6674 (LTS), 2025 WL 843709,

at *4 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 13, 2025) (“Plaintiff’s allegations that she was subjected to a

‘hostile work environment’ and ‘harassment’ are simply legal conclusions; instead,




                                           26
Plaintiff must plead facts about what occurred.”). And again, Coleman has not

challenged as defamatory Grand’s proffered factual support for her conclusion that

Coleman sexually harassed her.

      The cases that the dissent relies on for its view that Grand’s use of the term

“sexual harassment” is independently actionable, Dissent at 8–9, are readily

distinguishable. In each of those cases, the defamatory statements either included

concrete factual assertions that the plaintiff challenged as untrue or implied

undisclosed facts that cast the plaintiff in a negative light. See Lively v. Wayfarer

Studios LLC, 786 F. Supp. 3d 695, at 764–65 (S.D.N.Y. 2025) (statements including

unadorned accusation of “sexual assault” and characterization of the plaintiff as a

“sexual predator”); Menaker v. C.D., No. 17-cv-5840 (DRH), 2018 WL 5776533, at *4

(E.D.N.Y. Nov. 1, 2018) (statements regarding “unwanted and unwarranted sexual

harassment” based on allegedly false accusations of, among other things,

inappropriate comments and verbal abuse toward female athletes); Giuffre v.

Maxwell, 165 F. Supp. 3d 147, 152 (S.D.N.Y. 2016) (statements accusing the plaintiff

of having lied about her own prior allegations of sexual assault and sex

trafficking); Thomas H., 18 N.Y.3d at 583, 585 (statements accusing the plaintiff of

raping a young child on two occasions, including by inserting a finger into the




                                         27
child’s vagina and having sexual intercourse with the victim); Williams, 681

N.Y.S.2d at 277–78 (“alleged purported incidents of sexual harassment”

challenged as untrue); Alianza Dominicana, Inc., 645 N.Y.S.2d at 30 (allegation of

sexual harassment and abuse based on undisclosed facts). By contrast, New York

law is clear that accusations of misconduct “could be regarded as mere hypothesis

and therefore not actionable if the facts on which they are based are fully and

accurately set forth and it is clear to the reasonable reader or listener that the

accusation is merely a personal surmise built upon those facts.” Gross, 82 N.Y.2d

at 155. Viewed in context, Grand’s use of the term “sexual harassment” fits

comfortably within that principle.

      Unable to identify a single factual statement from Grand’s letter that

Coleman actually challenges as false, the dissent seeks refuge in the principle that

we “must give the disputed language a fair reading in the context of the

publication as a whole.” Dissent at 4 (quoting Armstrong v. Simon & Schuster, Inc.,

85 N.Y.2d 373, 380 (1995)). But placing the statements Coleman actually challenges

in context makes clear that Coleman only contests Grand’s conclusions and

subjective characterizations, not the underlying facts. Coleman, for instance,

challenges Grand’s conclusion that he “convinced [her] to be intimate with him,”




                                         28
not her factual claim that he had previously “said it was not interesting for him to

talk to [her] if there was going to be no sexual interaction.” J. App’x at 37–38.

Coleman complains about Grand’s use of the idiomatic expression “never take no

for an answer,” but does not deny the underlying factual claim that he became

“angry” when she “wouldn’t sleep with him” and “would call [her] in the middle

of the night.” Id. at 39. And Coleman, like the dissent, assails Grand’s choice of

the label “sexual harassment,” but without denying that he told Grand that she

“owed him a ‘lifetime of p[*]ssy’ for what he had taught [her]” and that he “looked

forward to [her] breaking down so that [she] would come to him.” Id. The dissent

seems to wish that Coleman had brought a stronger case than he did, but we must

decide the one before us. 4

       In the end, Coleman and the dissent may disagree with Grand’s belief that

the facts set forth in her letter rise to the level of sexual harassment. See Dissent at

10 (referring to Grand’s belief that “Coleman sexually harassed her within their

professional relationship”). But under New York law, Grand is free to express that



4The dissent is wrong to compare Coleman’s claim to the one brought in Gross. See Dissent at 10.
The plaintiff in Gross challenged as false the specific facts underlying the defendant’s allegations
of “corrupt” conduct: that the plaintiff “had issued false or misleading reports about deaths
occurring within his jurisdiction in order to protect the police.” 82 N.Y.2d at 150, 154–56.
Coleman, by contrast, challenges Grand’s belief that his conduct amounted to sexual harassment
but not the disclosed facts on which Grand’s opinion was based.


                                                29
view while letting the reader decide whether the disclosed facts support her

position. Because Coleman challenges only Grand’s expressions of non-actionable

opinion – and not the facts supporting those opinions – we cannot agree with the

dissent that the district court erred in concluding that Coleman’s defamation claim

fails as a matter of law.

                                IV. CONCLUSION

      For these reasons, we find that none of the challenged statements in this case

are defamatory. Accordingly, we AFFIRM the district court’s judgment.




                                        30
21-800-cv
Coleman v. Grand

MENASHI, Circuit Judge, dissenting:

       In a letter to friends and colleagues, Maria Grand accused
Steven Coleman of sexually harassing her during their professional
relationship as musicians. According to Grand, Coleman started the
relationship by telling her—when she was seventeen-years old—that
he wanted to have sex with her. As Grand’s saxophone teacher,
Coleman told Grand “many, many times that the best thing” she
could do to learn music was to have sex with male musicians. J. App’x
37. He even told her “not to contact him [if] [she] didn’t plan on
having sex with him.” Id. After Coleman “convinced [Grand] to be
intimate with him,” Coleman “started hiring [her] to work with him
too.” Id. at 38. But when he gave her work, he would “get angry and
tell [her] not to finish the work, because [she] wouldn’t sleep with
him.” Id. at 39. And “[w]henever he offered [her] more work, he
would wait until [she] actually slept with him to solidify the dates.”
Id.

       While on tour, Grand “would have to sleep with [Coleman] at
the end of the day” or he would “be absolutely angry and sometimes
refuse to rehearse.” Id. “He would relentlessly ask [her] to have sex
with him.” Id. He allegedly told Grand that she “owed him ‘a lifetime
of pussy’ for what he had taught [her].” Id. After a workshop, Grand
and Coleman stayed in the same room together, but despite Grand’s
insistence that she would not have sex with Coleman, she woke up to
him “half-naked, kissing [her] on the lips.” Id. at 40. When Grand’s
boyfriend showed up at a concert, Coleman became “extremely
angry” and told Grand that “he didn’t want [her] to play on some
other gigs he had previously asked [her] to sit in on.” Id. When Grand
refused to have a threesome with Coleman and another woman,
Coleman “became furious at [her] for saying no and told [her] not to
come to the show that day.” Id. As Grand summarized the
relationship, “when I stopped agreeing to sleep with him he stopped
granting me access to his knowledge, and he made my professional
life with him a complete nightmare.” Id. at 38.

      According to the majority opinion, “Grand was merely
explaining how she internally felt” about “whether Coleman was a
good or bad partner.” Ante at 15-16. Her account of sexual harassment
reflected only “her subjective assessment” of “a complicated …
relationship” and the “subjectiveness of Grand’s feelings” about it.
Id. at 21, 15. As a result, the majority concludes that the letter cannot
“be said to expose Coleman ‘to public hatred,’” to “contempt,” or to
“an evil opinion of one in the minds of right-thinking persons.” Id. at
14 (quoting Celle v. Filipino Rep. Enters. Inc., 209 F.3d 163, 177 (2d Cir.
2000)).

      The majority might not consider me a right-thinking person,
but I would have a negative opinion of someone who behaved the
way that Grand described. And it seems to me that her account is
either true or false. The majority insists that Grand’s statement that
Coleman sexually harassed her was an opinion “based on a recitation
of supporting facts that Coleman has not disputed.” Ante at 20. But
while Coleman has not disputed the existence of a sexual relationship
with Grand, he has disputed the factual claims that the relationship
was harassing or unwanted. That means the details of the relationship
that Grand provided are not uncontested. Coleman’s claim that he did
not engage in “sexual harassment” is a challenge to Grand’s account
of the relationship rather than to her use of that particular phrase.

      In the context of the letter, whether Coleman sexually harassed
Grand is not “a subjective inquiry that permits differing opinions.” Id.
at 17. A reasonable reader of Grand’s letter would not understand it


                                    2
to contain “a figurative expression of how Grand felt” but specific
factual allegations of abusive conduct by Coleman. Id. at 14 (alteration
omitted) (quoting Springer v. Almontaser, 904 N.Y.S.2d 765, 767 (2d
Dep’t 2010)). Coleman certainly understood the letter to be making
the factual claim that he sexually harassed Grand and exploited their
professional relationship for sexual gratification. Coleman sued for
defamation and alleged that he never sexually harassed Grand, that
he engaged only in consensual relations, and that Grand actually
manipulated him to gain professional advantages. More important,
readers of the letter understood it to make factual claims: three band
members quit “as the result of Ms. Grand’s Letter,” and six organizers
canceled future engagements with Coleman “because of the ‘cloud
that exists now.’” J. App’x 146.

      If Grand made the same allegations in a Title VII complaint, she
would state a claim for sex discrimination. It would not be a viable
defense for the employer to claim that “Grand was merely explaining
how she internally felt.” Ante at 15. Because I would reach the same
conclusion about her claims in this posture, I dissent.

                                    I

      Under New York law, “[m]aking a false statement that tends to
expose a person to public contempt, hatred, ridicule, aversion or
disgrace constitutes defamation.” Thomas H. v. Paul B., 18 N.Y.3d 580,
584 (2012). But “[e]xpressions of opinion, as opposed to assertions of
fact, are deemed privileged and, no matter how offensive, cannot be
the subject of an action for defamation.” Mann v. Abel, 10 N.Y.3d 271,
276 (2008). Because “only assertions of fact are capable of being
proven    false,”   an   action    for   defamation   cannot   proceed
“unless … premised on published assertions of fact.” Brian v.
Richardson, 87 N.Y.2d 46, 51 (1995).


                                    3
      When distinguishing fact from opinion, the “dispositive
inquiry … is whether a reasonable reader could have concluded that
[the statements] were conveying facts about the plaintiff.” Gross v.
N.Y. Times Co., 82 N.Y.2d 146, 152 (1993) (internal quotation marks
and alteration omitted). Courts consider three factors: (1) whether the
statements have “a precise meaning which is readily understood”;
(2) “whether the statements are capable of being proven true or false”;
and (3) whether the “full context” or the “broader social context” of
the statements shows “that what is being read or heard is likely to be
opinion, not fact.” Davis v. Boeheim, 24 N.Y.3d 262, 270 (2014) (quoting
Mann, 10 N.Y.3d at 276).

      In conducting the analysis, we “must consider the content of
the communication as a whole,” including “the over-all context in
which the assertions were made.” Brian, 87 N.Y.2d at 51; see also
Armstrong v. Simon & Schuster, Inc., 85 N.Y.2d 373, 380 (1995) (“[T]he
court must give the disputed language a fair reading in the context of
the publication as a whole.”). Accordingly, we must evaluate the
overall message of the letter rather than isolate individual sentences
from that context. “Challenged statements are not to be read in
isolation, but must be perused as the average reader would against
the ‘whole apparent scope and intent’ of the writing.” Celle, 209 F.3d
at 177 (quoting November v. Time Inc., 13 N.Y.2d 175, 178 (1963)). When
Grand’s statements are evaluated in the context of the letter, the three
factors point in the same direction: a reasonable reader would
understand Grand’s accusations as statements of fact rather than
opinion. Either Coleman sexually harassed Grand or he did not. That
is a jury question, not a matter of figurative expression.




                                   4
                                   A

      Grand told friends and colleagues that Coleman “sexually
harassed [her] inside of a professional relationship.” J. App’x 36. She
offered a detailed narrative of Coleman’s behavior, recounting
episodes in which Coleman used his position as a popular musician
to extract sexual favors and to retaliate when she declined. She
claimed that he refused to teach her unless she had sex with him, that
he withheld work opportunities “until [she] actually slept with him,”
and that he “made [her] professional life with him a complete
nightmare” when she “stopped agreeing to sleep with him.” Id. 38-39.
Those allegations have a precise meaning, are susceptible of proof,
and would be understood in context as statements of fact rather than
opinion.

      First, the allegations have a precise meaning. When
“accompanied by specific details of [the] plaintiff’s … actions,” a
reasonable reader would understand the letter to claim that Coleman
used his professional status to pressure Grand into sex. Thomas H.,
18 N.Y.3d at 585. Grand “used specific, easily understood language”
to describe Coleman’s conduct, “not rhetorical hyperbole.” Davis,
24 N.Y.3d at 271 (internal quotation marks omitted). And a reader
would understand that such allegations do not convey mere feelings
of discontent. Sexual harassment is an illegal form of sex
discrimination under federal and state law. See, e.g., Redd v. N.Y. Div.
of Parole, 678 F.3d 166, 175 (2d Cir. 2012) (describing sexual
harassment under Title VII); N.Y. Exec. Law § 296(1)(h) (prohibiting
an employer from “subject[ing] any individual to harassment because
of an individual’s … sex”). If Grand made the same allegations in a
Title VII complaint against an employer, she would state a claim for
sex discrimination. See Karibayan v. Columbia Univ., 14 F.3d 773, 777
(2d Cir. 1994) (“[T]o establish a prima facie case of quid pro quo

                                   5
harassment, a plaintiff must present evidence that she was subject to
unwelcome sexual conduct, and that her reaction to that conduct was
then used as the basis for decisions affecting the compensation, terms,
conditions or privileges of her employment.”). And that would lead
to a trial in which a jury would determine whether her account of the
relationship was accurate.

      Second, the allegations are capable of proof. Coleman “either
did or did not commit the acts.” Thomas H., 18 N.Y.3d at 586. He either
told Grand to have sex with him to receive his instruction or he did
not. He either withheld professional opportunities to retaliate against
Grand when she refused to have sex or he did not. These are not
subjective opinions. Courts routinely consider such allegations, and
juries make factual findings about whether sexual harassment
occurred. When an employee makes allegations like those Grand
made here, the jury will consider “all triable issues as to whether [the
supervisor] used his position to intimidate her into the relationship
and as to whether the sexual conduct on his part was, in fact,
‘unwelcome.’” Overbeck v. Alpha Animal Health, 2 N.Y.S.3d 541, 544 (2d
Dep’t 2015). Courts have acknowledged that “the question of whether
particular conduct was ‘unwelcome’ presents ‘difficult problems of
proof and turns largely on credibility determinations committed to
the trier of fact,’” but “‘the fact that sex-related conduct was
“voluntary,” in the sense that the plaintiff was not forced to
participate against her will, is not a defense,’ and the ‘correct inquiry
is whether the plaintiff by her conduct indicated that the alleged
sexual advances were unwelcome.’” Id. (alterations omitted) (quoting
Meritor Sav. Bank, FSB v. Vinson, 477 U.S. 57, 68 (1986)); see also Depp v.
Heard, No. CL-2019-2911, 2021 WL 6550462, at *4 (Va. Cir. Ct. Jan. 4,
2021) (“[W]hether [Johnny] Depp abused [Amber] Heard is a fact
capable of being proven true or false.”).

                                    6
      Our laws rely on the premise that allegations of misconduct
such as those leveled here can be proven true or false. In her letter,
Grand even offered evidence to support her allegations. She told her
readers that she “ha[d] proof for most of what I’m talking about here”
and offered to share “text messages” as evidence. J. App’x 36. A
reasonable reader would understand a statement in which the author
offered to prove her claims as “capable of being proven true or false.”
Davis, 24 N.Y.3d at 270 (quoting Mann, 10 N.Y.3d at 276).

      Third, the full context of the letter as well as the social context
in which it was written shows that Grand’s letter would be expected
to convey factual claims of sexual harassment. Grand’s “accusation[s]
[were] made in the course of a lengthy, copiously documented
[letter],” recounting specific events between her and Coleman over
multiple years. Gross, 82 N.Y.2d at 156. Grand sent the letter to a
group of friends and colleagues to share her experience with “sexism
in the music industry” in the context of the #MeToo movement that
aimed to raise awareness about women who have been sexually
harassed and to expose their harassers. J. App’x 34. In this context, “a
reasonable listener or reader [would be] likely to understand [her]
remark as an assertion of provable fact.” Gross, 82 N.Y.2d at 155.

                                   B

      The district court resisted this straightforward conclusion by
insisting that Grand was only “describing her subjective experience”
and “sharing personal opinions on a difficult relationship.” Coleman
v. Grand, 523 F. Supp. 3d 244, 263 (E.D.N.Y. 2021). But no reasonable
reader would interpret her letter that way. Grand did not merely
describe her feelings about Coleman’s behavior. She alleged multiple
instances of sexual harassment in which Coleman conditioned
professional opportunities on sexual intercourse, and she alleged that


                                   7
Coleman made her professional life miserable when she refused.
These were not “subjective” statements about Grand’s “perception”
but serious accusations of misconduct. Ante at 23. And readers in fact
understood the letter to make such accusations. Musicians refused to
work with Coleman following the distribution of the letter because
they credited the accusations as true. See J. App’x 146-47; see also
Coleman, 523 F. Supp. 3d at 253 (“Coleman’s expert estimates his
losses topped $1.2 million.”).

      The majority says that “[w]hether conduct rises to the level of
harassment … is often a subjective inquiry.” Ante at 17. But courts
routinely hold that accusations of sexual harassment such as Grand’s
qualify as statements of fact rather than opinion. See, e.g., Lively v.
Wayfarer Studios LLC, 786 F. Supp. 3d 695, 764-65 (S.D.N.Y. 2025)
(explaining that “[a] false accusation of sexual assault or similar
sexual misconduct can support a defamation claim” and that a
statement that the plaintiff “is a ‘sexual predator’ could reasonably be
understood as a claim of fact that [the plaintiff] had engaged in sexual
misconduct”); Menaker v. C.D., No. 17-CV-5840, 2018 WL 5776533, at
*4-5 (E.D.N.Y. Nov. 1, 2018) (holding that allegations of “unwarranted
sexual harassment” have “a precise meaning, are capable of being
proven false, and are likely to be taken as facts in [this] context”);
Giuffre v. Maxwell, 165 F. Supp. 3d 147, 152 (S.D.N.Y. 2016) (“[T]here
cannot be differing understandings of the same facts that justify
diametrically opposed opinion as to whether Defendant was involved
in Plaintiff’s abuse as Plaintiff has claimed.”); Thomas H., 18 N.Y.3d at
585 (holding that allegations of sexual assault “accompanied by
specific details” were “actionable statements of fact”); Chiavarelli v.
Williams, 681 N.Y.S.2d 276, 277 (1st Dep’t 1998) (holding that an
“assertion that plaintiff would misuse his supervisory power over
residents to obtain sexual favors” was a statement of fact); Alianza

                                   8
Dominicana, Inc. v. Luna, 645 N.Y.S.2d 28, 30 (1st Dep’t 1996)
(“[A]ccusations of sexual harassment and sexual abuse … are
susceptible of a defamatory meaning and would have been
understood by a reasonable viewer to be assertions of provable fact.”)
(internal quotation marks and alteration omitted).

      Contrary to the majority’s suggestion, Coleman disputes the
account of the relationship that Grand provided. Coleman alleged
that the letter contained “untrue statements alleging [that Coleman]
engaged in a pattern of abuse, sexual harassment and sexual acts
without the consent of [Grand].” J. App’x 158. The majority even
recognizes that Coleman has expressly argued that Grand’s
“statement that [Coleman] ‘convinced’ her to be intimate with him is
clearly a fabrication” because she initiated the relationship, id. at 1395,
that Grand’s statement that “the sexual harassment started” in
September 2013 was false because at that point Coleman “ended the
relationship” and Grand “pursued him,” id. at 1396, and that there
was never even a single instance in which he “initiated intimacy and
refused to take ‘no’ for an answer,” id. at 1397. The majority considers
each of these statements in isolation and again perceives only matters
of subjective opinion. See ante at 13-24. But the statements must be
understood “in the context of the entire statement or publication as a
whole, and tested against the understanding of the average reader.”
Celle, 209 F.3d at 177 (emphasis and alteration omitted) (quoting
Aronson v. Wiersma, 65 N.Y.2d 592, 594 (1985)). Despite that mandate,
the majority somehow examines a bitter dispute over alleged sexual
misconduct and concludes that everyone actually agrees on what
happened. No reasonable reader could believe that.

      Grand’s accusation that Coleman sexually harassed her was not
an opinion about how she felt about neutral facts. It was a factual
assertion about the details and the character of Coleman’s conduct.

                                    9
Statements of that kind are actionable under New York defamation
law. In Gross v. New York Times Co., the New York Court of Appeals
held that accusing a medical examiner of being “corrupt” and
engaging in “cover-ups” qualified as a statement of fact even though
the speaker offered specific examples of that behavior. 82 N.Y.2d at
154-56. Accusations of corruption or of a coverup can be “actionable
charges” even when “couched in the language of hypothesis or
conclusion.” Id. at 154. The New York Court of Appeals has also held
that accusing someone of multiple sexual assaults—even when
“accompanied by specific details of [the accused’s] threats and actions
during the incidents”—qualified as an actionable statement of fact.
Thomas H., 18 N.Y.3d at 585. The majority opinion cites Gross sixteen
times but sidesteps the relevant point: If accusations of corruption
“convey ‘facts’ that are capable of being proven true or false,” Gross,
82 N.Y.2d at 155, then the specific accusations of sexual harassment
here do too. The majority opinion simply posits that Coleman agrees
with Grand on the underlying facts, even though he obviously does
not.

       Grand asserted that Coleman sexually harassed her within
their professional relationship. That was not a “rhetorical flourish or
[a] speculative accusation.” Id. at 155-56. Those were “actionable
charges” that “actually would be understood by the reasonable reader
as assertions of fact.” Id. at 154; see Silsdorf v. Levine, 59 N.Y.2d 8, 16
(1983) (holding that the “unmistakable import of such statements” as
“it pays to do business with the mayor” is that the mayor “misused
his public office and acted illegally to promote the interests of his
clients and thus of himself”). Together with Grand’s allegations of
specific incidents, a reasonable reader would understand her to have
made factual claims about Coleman.



                                    10
                                   II

      While the majority does not reach the issue, the district court
held that Coleman could not succeed without showing that Grand
made the statements with actual malice and that Coleman had not
established a question of material fact that she had done so. See
Coleman, 523 F. Supp. 3d at 259-61. The district court was wrong to
apply the actual malice standard. New York’s revised anti-SLAPP
statute, which applies the actual malice standard to suits arising out
of “public petition and participation,” likely does not apply here
because its application would be retroactive. Cf. Gottwald v. Sebert, 40
N.Y.3d 240, 260 (2023) (“[T]he strong presumption against retroactive
legislation has not been overcome with respect to the amendments to
the anti-SLAPP statute.”). Even if the statute applied retroactively,
Grand’s private email sent to colleagues and friends would not
qualify as a “communication in a place open to the public or a public
forum.” N.Y. Civ. Rights Law § 76-a(1)(a)(1).

      But even if Coleman were required to show that Grand
circulated her letter “with knowledge of its falsity or with reckless
disregard of whether it was false,” he identified sufficient evidence to
survive summary judgment. Id. § 76-a(2). Grand had personal
knowledge of the events recounted in her letter; she based her
allegations not on third-party testimony or inferences but on her first-
hand experience with Coleman over multiple years. And she
circulated her letter shortly after their professional relationship, when
she would have had a clear memory of the events. She claimed that
throughout the relationship, Coleman sexually harassed her by
conditioning professional opportunities on sexual favors. If those
claims were false, a reasonable jury could find that Grand knew that
the claims were false.


                                   11
                          *      *     *

      Grand accused Coleman of serious misconduct that would
naturally lead to public scorn. And Grand made the accusation by
leveling allegations of specific conduct. Reasonable readers would—
and did—understand the accusation to convey facts rather than
opinions. Because the majority concludes that such a serious
accusation of sexual harassment may be dismissed as mere subjective
opinion, I dissent.




                                12