23-1174-cv
    Culwick v. Wood


                           UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
                               FOR THE SECOND CIRCUIT

                                   SUMMARY ORDER
RULINGS BY SUMMARY ORDER DO NOT HAVE PRECEDENTIAL EFFECT. CITATION TO A SUMMARY ORDER
FILED ON OR AFTER JANUARY 1, 2007, IS PERMITTED AND IS GOVERNED BY FEDERAL RULE OF APPELLATE
PROCEDURE 32.1 AND THIS COURT’S LOCAL RULE 32.1.1. WHEN CITING A SUMMARY ORDER IN A
DOCUMENT FILED WITH THIS COURT, A PARTY MUST CITE EITHER THE FEDERAL APPENDIX OR AN
ELECTRONIC DATABASE (WITH THE NOTATION “SUMMARY ORDER”). A PARTY CITING TO A SUMMARY
ORDER MUST SERVE A COPY OF IT ON ANY PARTY NOT REPRESENTED BY COUNSEL.

           At a stated term of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, held at
    the Thurgood Marshall United States Courthouse, 40 Foley Square, in the City of New York,
    on the 27th day of May, two thousand twenty-five.

    PRESENT:
                JOSEPH F. BIANCO,
                BETH ROBINSON,
                SARAH A. L. MERRIAM,
                      Circuit Judges.
    _____________________________________

    VIVIENNE CULWICK, AS ADMINISTRATOR
    OF THE ESTATE OF STEVEN ELIOT WOOD,


                            Plaintiff-Counter-Defendant-Appellee,


                      v.                                                   23-1174-cv


    ANDRAE E. WOOD, AKA ANDRAE E. KIPIN,

                      Defendant-Counter-Claimant-Appellant.
    _____________________________________


    FOR DEFENDANT-COUNTER-                              ANTHONY J. PROSCIA (Adam M. Marshall, on
    CLAIMANT-APPELLANT:                                 the brief), Kaufman Dolowich LLP, New
                                                        York, New York.
FOR PLAINTIFF-COUNTER-                               PERRY S. FRIEDMAN, New York, New York.
DEFENDANT-APPELLEE:

       Appeal from the judgment of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of

New York (Eric N. Vitaliano, Judge).

       UPON DUE CONSIDERATION, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND

DECREED that the judgment of the district court, entered on July 19, 2023, is AFFIRMED.

       Defendant-Counter-Claimant-Appellant Andrae E. Wood (“Wood’) appeals the award of

summary judgment in favor of Plaintiff-Counter-Defendant-Appellee Vivienne Culwick, as

Administratrix of the Estate of Steven Eliot Wood (the “Estate”), on the Estate’s breach of contract

claim, the denial of summary judgment in Wood’s favor on that same claim, and the award of

damages against Wood in the sum of $924,818.35, plus post-judgment interest. We assume the

parties’ familiarity with the underlying facts, procedural history, and issues on appeal, to which

we refer only as necessary to explain our decision to affirm.

                                            BACKGROUND

       The Estate alleges that, in 2013, after the death of her former husband Steven Eliot Wood

(the “Decedent”), Wood wrongfully accepted annuity and pension benefits from the Decedent’s

prior employment based upon her designation as the primary beneficiary on certain forms executed

in 1984 (the “Designation Forms”). According to the second amended complaint, Wood waived

her right to these benefits in the Property Settlement Agreement (the “PSA”) that Wood and the

Decedent entered into at the time of their divorce in 2006, and thus, even though the Decedent

never removed Wood as the primary beneficiary on the Designation Forms, the Decedent’s father

was entitled to those benefits as the contingent beneficiary named in the Designation Forms. Upon

learning that Wood had claimed and accepted the Decedent’s annuity and pension benefits, the

Decedent’s father assigned to Culwick, as administratrix of the Estate, his claims against Wood


                                                 2
for the pension and annuity fund benefits. Culwick then brought the instant lawsuit in 2015,

alleging several causes of action against Wood, including a breach of contract claim, and Wood

asserted several counterclaims. Both parties moved for summary judgment.

       On May 18, 2019, the district court issued a Memorandum and Order granting summary

judgment in favor of the Estate on the breach of contract claim against Wood and denying Wood’s

cross-motion for summary judgment on that same claim. 1 See generally Culwick v. Wood, 384 F.

Supp. 3d 328 (E.D.N.Y. 2019) (“Culwick I”). In particular, the district court held that: (1) the

Estate had standing to bring the lawsuit; (2) the “probate exception” to federal subject matter

jurisdiction did not apply and the court possessed jurisdiction over the lawsuit; (3) Wood breached

the PSA by accepting the proceeds of the Decedent’s annuity fund and pension plan, and thus, was

liable on the breach of contract claim; and (4) the Decedent’s father was an intended third-party

beneficiary of that agreement, and thus, the Estate’s entitlement to the contractual damages flows

through the father’s assignment of his claim to the Estate. Id. at 337–50.

       Pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 54(b), Wood moved for reconsideration of the

district court’s order granting summary judgment to the Estate on its breach of contract claim and,

in the alternative, requested that the district court certify an interlocutory appeal from that order,

pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1292(b). The district court granted the motion, but only to the extent that,

upon reconsideration, it adhered to its original determination. See generally Culwick v. Wood, No.

15-cv-5868 (ENV) (SMG), 2019 WL 9663013 (E.D.N.Y. Aug. 14, 2019) (“Culwick II”). It also

denied the request for interlocutory certification. Id. at *1.




1
  The district court granted summary judgment to Wood on the Estate’s other claims and granted summary
judgment to the Estate on Wood’s counterclaims. The district court’s resolution of these claims is not
challenged on appeal.

                                                  3
       On the issue of damages, Magistrate Judge Cheryl L. Pollak issued a Report and

Recommendation (“R&R”) on September 9, 2021, recommending that the Estate be awarded a

total of $908,994.37, which comprised $574,901.24 for the annuity disbursement, plus

$139,255.72 in accumulated pre-judgment interest on that amount; $103,319.43 for the pension

benefit payments; $89,616.00 for attorney’s fees; and $1,901.98 in costs. See generally Culwick

v. Wood, No. 15-cv-5868 (ENV) (CLP), 2021 WL 7906500 (E.D.N.Y. Sept. 9, 2021) (“Culwick

III”). The R&R also recommended that the Estate’s request for pre-judgment interest on the

pension benefit award be denied without prejudice, in order to allow the Estate to provide

additional information regarding that calculation. Id. at *10. The R&R further recommended that

post-judgment interest be awarded. Id. at *12. On October 28, 2022, the district judge issued a

Memorandum and Order, rejecting the objections filed by the parties and adopting the R&R in its

entirety. See generally Culwick v. Wood, No. 15-cv-5868 (ENV) (CLP), 2022 WL 16230836

(E.D.N.Y. Oct. 28, 2022) (“Culwick IV”). On May 15, 2023, after the Estate filed an additional

affidavit, Magistrate Judge Pollak issued another R&R, which recommended that the Estate be

awarded $15,823.98 in pre-judgment interest on the pension benefit award, see generally Culwick

v. Wood, No. 15-cv-5868 (ENV) (CLP), 2023 WL 4490367 (E.D.N.Y. May 15, 2023) (“Culwick

V”), and which was adopted by the district judge, see Dist. Ct. Dkt. Minute Entry July 12, 2023.

This appeal followed.

                                        DISCUSSION

       We review de novo the district court’s grant of summary judgment, construing the evidence

in the light most favorable to the non-moving party and drawing all reasonable inferences in her

favor. McElwee v. Cnty. of Orange, 700 F.3d 635, 640 (2d Cir. 2012). “Summary judgment is

appropriate only when ‘the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact



                                               4
and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.’” Mihalik v. Credit Agricole Cheuvreux

N. Am., Inc., 715 F.3d. 102, 108 (2d Cir. 2013) (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a)).

       On appeal, Wood argues that the district court erred in: (1) granting summary judgment to

the Estate on the breach of contract claim; (2) determining that the Decedent’s father was an

intended beneficiary of the PSA, and the Estate, as the assignee of his claims, was entitled to the

contractual damages resulting from the breach; (3) denying Wood’s request to toll the

accumulation of pre-judgment interest; and (4) awarding excessive attorney’s fees. As set forth

below, we find each of these arguments unpersuasive.

      I.      Breach of Contract 2

      “To prevail on a breach of contract claim under New Jersey law, a plaintiff must establish

three elements: (1) the existence of a valid contract between the parties; (2) failure of the defendant

to perform its obligations under the contract; and (3) a causal relationship between the breach and

the plaintiff’s alleged damages.” Sheet Metal Workers Int’l Ass’n Loc. Union No. 27, AFL-CIO v.

E.P. Donnelly, Inc., 737 F.3d 879, 900 (3d Cir. 2013). The Supreme Court of New Jersey has

instructed that “[w]here the terms of a contract are clear and unambiguous[,] there is no room for

interpretation or construction and we must enforce those terms as written.” Kutzin v. Pirnie,

124 N.J. 500, 507 (1991) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Therefore, “[w]e will

affirm a grant of summary judgment in a breach of contract action only where the contract is

unambiguous and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” Newport Assocs.

Dev. Co. v. Travelers Indem. Co. of Ill., 162 F.3d 789, 791 (3d Cir. 1998).




2
 The parties do not dispute that New Jersey law applies to the breach of contract claim, as well as to
Wood’s challenges to the award of pre-judgment interest and attorney’s fees.

                                                  5
        Wood argues that the language in the PSA is “ambiguous at best,” and thus, the district

court erred in granting summary judgment to the Estate and denying her cross-motion for summary

judgment. Appellant’s Br. at 33. We disagree.

        Paragraph (D)(3) of the PSA states that the Decedent “shall otherwise retain all pensions

and annuities acquired by him at any time, including during the term of the marriage,” and that

Wood waived “any claims she might have in and to these benefits including the right to be named

as a survivor beneficiary.” App’x at 159. Therefore, the plain language of this provision barred

Wood from claiming the Decedent’s pension and annuity benefits as a survivor beneficiary. Wood

contends that, notwithstanding that language, the PSA did not prevent the Decedent from choosing

to keep her as the primary beneficiary of the annuity and pension and thus it does not preclude her

from claiming those benefits. However, “there is no room for [that] interpretation or construction,”

Kutzin, 124 N.J. at 507, because the language in the PSA clearly and unambiguously states that

Wood relinquished “any claims she might have in and to these benefits,” without any limitations,

temporal or otherwise, App’x at 159 (emphasis added). In sum, the district court correctly held

that, because Wood claimed the Decedent’s benefits as a survivor beneficiary, she breached the

PSA, and the Estate was entitled to summary judgment on its breach of contract claim. 3

       II.     Third-Party Beneficiary

        Wood also contends that the district court erred in holding that, “[b]eing an intended third-

party beneficiary of the [PSA], the [D]ecedent’s father was entitled to enforce the agreement, and

having assigned his claims to the Estate, any damages owed to the [D]ecedent’s father are now


3
   Wood also asserts that the district court should have dismissed the Estate’s breach of contract claim
because the Estate failed to establish that it had suffered actual or nominal damages. We disagree. The
record clearly indicates that Wood’s breach of the PSA caused damages, and, as explained infra, the Estate
was entitled to damages flowing from that breach because, as the district court correctly determined, the
Decedent’s father was a third-party beneficiary of the PSA, and “having assigned his claims to the Estate,
any damages owed to [him] are now owed to the Estate.” Culwick I, 384 F. Supp 3d at 350.

                                                    6
owed to the Estate.” Culwick I, 384 F. Supp. 3d at 350. In particular, Wood asserts that the district

court, in reaching this determination, failed to properly address whether she, upon entering the

agreement, intended for the Decedent’s father to be a third-party beneficiary under the PSA. We

disagree.

      To determine whether an individual is a “third-party beneficiary” under New Jersey law,

we “focus[] on whether the parties to the contract intended others to benefit from the existence of

the contract, or whether the benefit so derived arises merely as an unintended incident of the

agreement.” Ross v. Lowitz, 222 N.J. 494, 513 (2015) (internal quotation marks and citation

omitted). Here, because the PSA required Wood to waive her right to any claim for benefits as a

survivor beneficiary, the parties clearly intended that another person—namely, whoever would

become the survivor beneficiary in Wood’s place—would benefit from that provision. In other

words, protecting another person’s right to those pension and annuity benefits was the entire

purpose, rather than an “unintended incident,” of that contractual provision. Id.

      Wood counters that there is no evidence that the Decedent specifically intended that his

father be the beneficiary of the PSA and notes: “Indeed, the Estate asserted in its summary

judgment papers that the Decedent simply neglected to change the Designation Forms in the years

following the divorce and opined that the Father’s continued status as contingent beneficiary for

the Annuity and Pension was coincidental.” Appellant’s Reply Br. at 11. Moreover, with respect

to her intention in signing the PSA, Wood emphasizes that “there is no evidence in the record that

[she] knew of the existence or identity of a contingent beneficiary for the Annuity and Pension.”

Id. However, these arguments miss the mark.

      New Jersey law does not require that parties to a contract specifically name the beneficiary

in that contract in order to confer third-party beneficiary status. Nor is there a requirement that the



                                                  7
contracting parties have a specific person or entity in mind when creating the benefit. Instead, “the

real test is whether the contracting parties intended that a third party should receive a benefit which

might be enforced in the courts; and the fact that such a benefit exists, or that the third party is

named, is merely evidence of this intention.” Broadway Maint. Corp. v. Rutgers, 90 N.J. 253, 259

(1982) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Thus, it is sufficient that “the parties to the

contract intended others to benefit from the existence of the contract,” even if the identity of the

intended beneficiary was not specifically agreed upon. Id.; see also Pollack v. Quick Quality

Rests., Inc., 452 N.J. Super. 174, 186 (App. Div. 2017) (explaining that, to confer rights on a third-

party beneficiary, “[t]he contract need not specifically identify the [intended beneficiary], as long

as the pertinent provisions of the contract and the surrounding circumstances demonstrate the

parties intended the [third party] to receive a direct benefit from the contract” (internal quotation

marks and citation omitted)); Eschle v. E. Freight Ways, Inc., 128 N.J. Super. 299, 305 (Law. Div.

1974) (“The fact that [the intended beneficiary]’s identity may not have been known at the time

the contract . . . was made does not prevent them from assuming the status of third party

beneficiaries.”). Here, at the time the contract was formed, both parties evinced an intention that

a third party would receive a direct benefit, namely the Decedent’s pension and annuity, which is

sufficient under New Jersey law to confer third-party beneficiary rights. Therefore, the district

court did not err in finding that the Decedent’s father was a third-party beneficiary of the PSA and

that, as the assignee of the father’s claims, the Estate was entitled to damages resulting from

Wood’s breach of the PSA.

       Finally, we find Wood’s procedural challenges to the district court’s determination—

including that she was not given notice of the third-party beneficiary theory and was denied an

opportunity to present evidence to rebut this theory—to be similarly unavailing. As a threshold



                                                  8
matter, as the district court catalogued in its denial of the reconsideration motion, “the record is

replete with language documenting [Wood]’s awareness of the factual and legal prerequisites for

recovery on a third-party beneficiary theory of damages.” Culwick II, 2019 WL 9663013, at *3.

Thus, on this record, we agree with the district court that “[Wood] was unquestionably aware that,

on the contractual interpretation advanced by [the Estate] and later adopted by the Court, the

[D]ecedent’s father, a third-party, was the one who stood to benefit from the contract.” Id.

      In any event, even assuming arguendo that Wood lacked notice that the district court could

grant summary judgment on this third-party beneficiary theory, she must demonstrate that she was

prejudiced by her inability to present additional evidence. See Bridgeway Corp. v. Citibank, 201

F.3d 134, 139–40 (2d Cir. 2000) (“A party is procedurally prejudiced if it is surprised by the district

court’s action and that surprise results in the party’s failure to present evidence in support of its

position. If, however, the party either cannot claim to have been surprised by the district court’s

action or if, notwithstanding its surprise, the party had no additional evidence to bring, it cannot

plausibly argue that it was prejudiced by the lack of notice.” (internal citation omitted)). Wood

has not demonstrated that she was prejudiced because her briefing with respect to the

reconsideration motion made clear that she had no additional evidence that could impact the third-

party beneficiary determination. To be sure, Wood suggests that “the legal briefs in support of the

Reconsideration Motion clearly expressed Wood’s desire to present additional relevant evidence

concerning whether she executed the PSA intending to confer a benefit on the Decedent’s [f]ather

(she didn’t); and whether Wood was even aware that there was a contingent beneficiary for the

Annuity and Pension in 2006 (she wasn’t).” Appellant’s Reply Br. at 8–9. However, as noted

supra, any additional evidence regarding her lack of intent to confer a benefit on the Decedent’s

father or her lack of awareness in 2006 of a contingent beneficiary for the annuity and pension



                                                  9
benefits does not advance the correct inquiry under New Jersey law on the issue, and thus, any

additional evidence could not undermine the district court’s determination that, “by entering the

contract, she objectively evinced an intention to confer a benefit on the contingent beneficiary of

the pension and annuity.” Culwick II, 2019 WL 9663013, at *6 n.3; see SmithKline Beecham

Corp. v. Rohm and Haas Co., 89 F.3d 154, 159 (3d Cir. 1996) (“Under New Jersey law, courts

should interpret a contract considering the objective intent manifested in the language of the

contract in light of the circumstances surrounding the transaction.” (internal quotation marks and

citation omitted)). Therefore, Wood was not procedurally prejudiced by the district court’s

consideration of the third-party beneficiary issue in connection with the Estate’s summary

judgment motion.

      III.    Pre-Judgment Interest

       Wood argues that pre-judgment interest should be tolled under New Jersey law. We

generally review awards of pre-judgment interest for abuse of discretion. See New England Ins.

Co. v. Healthcare Underwriters Mut. Ins. Co., 352 F.3d 599, 602–03 (2d Cir. 2003). As set forth

below, we discern no abuse of discretion in the district court’s determination to award such interest.

       Under New Jersey law, “[p]rejudgment interest may be awarded on contract claims in the

discretion of the court in accordance with equitable principles.” Sulcov v. 2100 Linwood Owners,

Inc., 303 N.J. Super. 13, 38 (App. Div. 1997). The “equitable purpose of prejudgment interest is

to compensate a party for lost earnings on a sum of money to which it was entitled, but which has

been retained by another.” N. Bergen Rex Transp., Inc. v. Trailer Leasing Co., 158 N.J. 561, 574–

75 (1999) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Moreover, although a court can toll or

suspend the payment of the usual pre-judgment interest in contract cases under exceptional

circumstances, that power should be exercised “sparingly.” Id.; see also Salas by Salas v. Wang,



                                                 10
846 F.2d 897, 909 (3d Cir. 1988) (“New Jersey courts have found exceptional circumstances on

the basis of equitable considerations when plaintiff is at fault or the litigation is delayed by court

order or where defendant is not fully insured.” (alterations adopted) (internal quotation marks and

citation omitted)).

       Wood principally argues that “[t]he reopening of discovery at the Estate’s request on

August 28, 2019 warrants a limited tolling of prejudgment interest.” Appellant’s Br. at 40. In

recommending that the district court deny Wood’s request to toll the accumulation of pre-judgment

interest, which the district court adopted, Culwick IV, 2022 WL 16230836, at *5, Magistrate Judge

Pollak rejected this precise argument, explaining in relevant part:

       This case does not present exceptional circumstances warranting tolling. The
       delays that occurred during the progression of this case occurred during the normal
       course of the litigation. Plaintiff’s request to reopen discovery after the motion for
       summary judgment was decided was granted by the court, indicating that the court
       considered it to be a good faith request and not a tactic to delay proceedings.

Culwick III, 2021 WL 7906500, at *11. Wood suggests that, even if the request was made in good

faith, the pre-judgment interest nevertheless should have been tolled because of “the Estate’s

inexcusable lack of diligence” and “the fact that the District Court was complicit in the delay.”

Appellant’s Br. at 41. However, this conclusory, unsupported assertion does not provide sufficient

grounds for us to conclude that the district court abused its discretion in determining that Wood

failed to demonstrate exceptional circumstances warranting tolling of the pre-judgment interest.

      IV.     Attorney’s Fees

      Wood argues that the award of attorney’s fees, pursuant to a fee-shifting provision in the

PSA, was unreasonable because the district court should have: (1) reduced the hourly rate of the

Estate’s counsel, Perry S. Friedman, to $350 per hour (rather than $400 per hour); (2) reduced the

number of billed hours in 2015 and 2016 because of the limited relationship of that work to the



                                                 11
Estate’s subsequent success; and (3) reduced the number of billed hours in 2019 and 2020 because

of overbilling. 4

       We review an award of attorney’s fees for reasonableness “in terms of the circumstances of

the particular case, and the district court’s determination will be reversed on appeal only for an

abuse of discretion.” Matthew Bender & Co. v. W. Publ’g. Co., 240 F.3d 116, 121 (2d Cir. 2001)

(internal quotation marks and citation omitted); accord Zalewski v. Cicero Builder Dev., Inc., 754

F.3d 95, 107–08 (2d Cir. 2014).          “The starting point in awarding attorneys’ fees is the

determination of the lodestar, which equals the number of hours reasonably expended multiplied

by a reasonable hourly rate.” Furst v. Einstein Moomjy, Inc., 182 N.J. 1, 21 (2004) (internal

quotation marks and citation omitted). In determining the hourly rate, “the court should evaluate

the rate of the prevailing attorney in comparison to rates for similar services by lawyers of

reasonably comparable skill, experience, and reputation in the community.” Id. at 22 (internal

quotation marks and citation omitted). When determining the number of hours reasonably

expended, “a trial court must determine whether the time expended in pursuit of the interests to be

vindicated, the underlying statutory objectives, and recoverable damages is equivalent to the time

competent counsel reasonably would have expended to achieve a comparable result.” Id. (internal

quotation marks and citation omitted).

       We find that Wood’s challenges to the fee award are without merit. With respect to

Friedman’s hourly rate, Magistrate Judge Pollak found that the rate of $400 per hour “adequately

reflects his experience, the work counsel performed, and the nature and complexity of the case,”

Culwick III, 2021 WL 7906500, at *19—a finding that was adopted by the district court, Culwick


4
  Wood also argues that the Estate was not entitled to fees because the damages in this case are nominal.
That argument is unavailing, however, because the damages awarded, totaling $678,220.67, are clearly not
nominal. See Culwick II, 2021 WL 7906500, at *4.


                                                   12
IV, 2022 WL 16230836, at *5—and we see no basis to disturb that reasonable exercise of discretion

in setting rates based upon the applicable factors. As to the number of hours billed in 2015 and

2016, Magistrate Judge Pollak correctly noted that, “[a]lthough the district court dismissed the

conversion claim as barred by the statute of limitations and the unjust enrichment claim as

precluded by the contract claim, there is no question that these two unsuccessful claims arose from

the same common core of facts and circumstances as the breach-of-contract claim—namely,

[Wood]’s agreement not to claim the [D]ecedent’s [a]nnuity and pension benefits.” Culwick III,

2021 WL 7906500, at *21 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted); see Singer v. State, 95

N.J. 487, 500 (1984) (“[I]f a plaintiff’s unsuccessful claims are related to the successful claims,

either by a common core of facts or related legal theories, the court must consider the significance

of the overall relief obtained to determine whether those hours devoted to the unsuccessful claims

should be compensated.” (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)); N. Bergen Rex Transp.,

Inc., 158 N.J. at 571 (“The party seeking attorneys’ fees need not recover all relief sought, but

rather, there must be the settling of some dispute that affected the behavior of the party asked to

pay attorneys’ fees towards the party seeking attorneys’ fees.” (alterations adopted) (internal

quotation marks and citation omitted)). Indeed, although it did not prevail on every claim, the

Estate obtained the entirety of relief sought in that it received all money damages identified in the

complaint, which supports an award for attorney’s fees without any reduction for the unsuccessful

claims. See Singer, 95 N.J. at 500. Thus, there is no basis to conclude that the district court, in

adopting the recommendation of Magistrate Judge Pollak, abused its discretion in declining to

reduce the number of billed hours during the 2015 and 2016 timeframe.

      Finally, we find equally unpersuasive Wood’s argument that the district court erred in

declining to reduce the number of billed hours in 2019 and 2020 due to overbilling. Magistrate



                                                 13
Judge Pollak recommended an across-the-board reduction of 10 percent because “[t]he time that

[the Estate’s] counsel claims to have spent on at least some of the tasks that he documents for this

period appears to be somewhat excessive for an attorney of his level of experience,” Culwick III,

2021 WL 7906500, at *23, and the district court adopted that recommendation, Culwick IV, 2022

WL 16230836, at *5. Wood nevertheless asserts that the district court should have imposed an

across-the-board reduction of 35 percent. Under New Jersey law, “[w]hether the hours the

prevailing attorney devoted to any part of a case are excessive ultimately requires consideration of

what is reasonable under the circumstances.” Furst, 182 N.J. at 22–23. Here, the district court did

not abuse its discretion in determining that the reduction of 10 percent, rather than some higher

percentage, was reasonable.

                                 *               *              *

       We have considered Wood’s remaining arguments and conclude that they are without merit.

Accordingly, the judgment of the district court is AFFIRMED.


                                              FOR THE COURT:
                                              Catherine O’Hagan Wolfe, Clerk of Court




                                                14