FOR PUBLICATION

   UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
        FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

DOCTOR’S BEST, INC., a Delaware            No. 24-2719
corporation,
                                             D.C. No.
                                          8:23-cv-00766-
            Plaintiff - Appellee,
                                             KK-KES
 v.
                                            OPINION
NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS,
LLC, a Wisconsin limited liability
company,

            Defendant - Appellant.

       Appeal from the United States District Court
          for the Central District of California
        Kenly Kiya Kato, District Judge, Presiding

         Argued and Submitted February 10, 2025
                  Pasadena, California

                    Filed July 15, 2025

  Before: Richard A. Paez, Sandra S. Ikuta, and Ryan D.
                 Nelson, Circuit Judges.

                 Opinion by Judge Paez;
           Special Concurrence by Judge Ikuta
2     DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC


                          SUMMARY *


                          Lanham Act

    The panel affirmed the district court’s summary
judgment in favor of Doctor’s Best, Inc., on its claim for a
declaratory judgment of non-infringement and on Nature’s
Way Products, LLC’s counterclaim for trademark
infringement under the Lanham Act.
    Nature’s Way owned the U.S. trademark “Nature’s
Way” for use on its nutritional supplements. Doctor’s Best,
a competitor, developed a new line of branded supplements,
“Nature’s Day,” and sought a U.S. trademark. The
“Nature’s Day” mark appeared on goods that were
manufactured and transported in the United States but were
exclusively sold and marketed to consumers abroad.
    Abitron Austria GmbH v. Hetronic International, Inc.,
600 U.S. 412 (2023), holds that the trademark infringement
provisions of the Lanham Act are not extraterritorial and
extend only to claims where the claimed infringing use in
commerce is domestic. The panel held that the district court
properly applied Abitron’s extraterritoriality framework to
determine which of Doctor’s Best’s activities were
actionable under the Lanham Act. The only actionable (i.e.,
domestic) conduct was the U.S. transport of Doctor’s Best’s
Nature’s Day products. The panel held that the district court
properly applied the Sleekcraft factors in concluding that
Nature’s Way could not show a likelihood of consumer
confusion as to this conduct. The panel thus agreed with the

*
 This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
     DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC     3


district court that no rational jury could find that Doctor’s
Best’s domestic conduct infringed Nature’s Way’s protected
trademarks.
    Specially concurring, Judge Ikuta wrote that she
concurred in the result. She wrote that Doctor’s Best’s
transport of Nature’s Day supplements in the United States
constituted a domestic use in commerce, and the evidence in
the record did not create a genuine issue of material fact as
to whether this transport caused a likelihood of domestic
confusion. Judge Ikuta wrote that, under Abitron, the court
does not consider extraterritorial consumer confusion.



                        COUNSEL

G. Warren Bleeker (argued) and M. John Carson, Lewis
Roca Rothgerber Christie LLP, Glendale, California, for
Plaintiff-Appellee.
Aaron T. Olejniczak (argued) and Christopher R. Liro,
Andrus Intellectual Property Law LLP, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin; Peter E. Garrell, Garrell Cohon Kennedy LLP,
Los Angeles, California, for Defendant-Appellant.
4     DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC


                         OPINION

PAEZ, Circuit Judge:

    In this appeal, we consider the impact of Abitron Austria
GmbH v. Hetronic International, Inc., 600 U.S. 412 (2023),
on a claim of trademark infringement under the Lanham Act,
where the allegedly infringing mark appears on goods that
are manufactured and transported in the United States, but
exclusively sold and marketed to consumers abroad.
    Nature’s Way Products (NWP) has long owned the U.S.
trademark “Nature’s Way” for use on its well-known
nutritional supplements. Doctor’s Best (DB), a competitor,
recently developed a new line of branded supplements,
“Nature’s Day,” and sought a U.S. trademark. In response
to DB’s suit for a declaratory judgment of non-infringement,
NWP asserted a counterclaim for trademark infringement
under the Lanham Act. The district court granted summary
judgment to DB, concluding that NWP failed to raise a
genuine issue of material fact that DB’s actionable domestic
conduct was likely to cause consumer confusion.
    On appeal, NWP argues: (1) the district court misapplied
Abitron’s extraterritoriality framework; (2) alternatively, the
district court erred in finding no genuine issue of material
fact as to the likelihood of consumer confusion; and (3) the
district court abused its discretion in denying NWP’s request
to defer summary judgment proceedings to permit additional
discovery.
    We affirm. As the record shows, DB, the alleged
infringer, uses the challenged mark in both domestic and
foreign commerce, but the sole domestic “use in commerce”
is the transport of products bearing the mark from a
      DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC             5


California manufacturing facility to overseas markets. On
these facts, the district court did not err in applying Abitron’s
extraterritoriality framework to determine which of DB’s
activities were actionable under the Lanham Act. Further,
given that the only actionable (i.e., domestic) conduct was
the U.S. transport of DB’s Nature’s Day products, the district
court properly applied the Sleekcraft factors 1 in concluding
that NWP could not show a likelihood of consumer
confusion. Thus, we agree with the district court that no
rational jury could find that DB’s domestic conduct
infringed NWP’s protected trademarks in violation of the
Lanham Act.
                         I. Background
                             A. Facts
    NWP is a nutritional supplement company that has
marketed and sold products under its “Nature’s Way” mark
in the U.S. since 1969. DB is another nutritional supplement
company that recently developed a line of Nature’s Day
branded supplements.
    DB manufactures Nature’s Day products in Tustin,
California, but exclusively sells and markets them outside
the U.S. 2 Nature’s Day products are sold to consumers in
China, South Korea, and Taiwan. A DB executive for
commercial development stated in a declaration that it was
her understanding that the Nature’s Day product labels—
including the Nature’s Day word mark and design—were

1
 AMF Inc. v. Sleekcraft Boats, 599 F.2d 341, 348–49 (9th Cir. 1979),
abrogated in part on other grounds by Mattel, Inc. v. Walking Mountain
Prods., 353 F.3d 792 (9th Cir. 2003).
2
 Separate from the “Nature’s Day” products at issue in this case, DB
sells “Doctor’s Best” branded supplements at major U.S. retailers.
6    DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC


independently created by a third-party in China for use in
Asian markets, without reference to NWP’s marks.
    DB disavows any intent to sell or market Nature’s Day
products to end consumers in the U.S. by any means. The
record shows that DB manufactures Nature’s Day
supplements in the U.S. and labels them in English because
it has determined that foreign consumers view U.S. goods as
premium, high-quality, and safe products. The record
further shows that Nature’s Day product labels contain
information required by U.S. regulations, including a Food
and Drug Administration disclaimer, because domestically
manufactured products must comply with U.S. labeling
requirements, regardless of where they are advertised and
sold.
    DB owns an international trademark for the Nature’s
Day mark. In 2022, it filed an application with the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office for the Nature’s Day mark,
covering nutritional supplements on an intent-to-use basis.
Upon discovering the application, NWP sent a cease-and-
desist letter to DB, identifying NWP’s ownership of the
Nature’s Way mark and asserting superior rights.
                  B. Procedural History
    In response to NWP’s demand letter, DB filed suit in
May 2023, seeking a declaratory judgment of non-
infringement under the Federal Declaratory Judgment Act,
28 U.S.C. §§ 2201–2202.         NWP counterclaimed for
infringement and related claims.
    In June 2023, the Supreme Court decided Abitron,
holding that the provisions of the Lanham Act underlying
NWP’s trademark infringement counterclaim “are not
extraterritorial and . . . extend only to claims where the
      DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC     7


claimed infringing use in commerce is domestic.” 600 U.S.
at 415 (citing 15 U.S.C. §§ 1114(1)(a), 1125(a)(1)).
    Discovery opened in September 2023, after the parties
held their Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 26(f) scheduling
conference. Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(d)(1). The district court set
June 6, 2024, as the close of discovery, and ordered that
dispositive motions be heard by August 5, 2024. In late
December 2023, roughly five months before the discovery
deadline, DB notified NWP that it intended to move for
summary judgment as to non-infringement. DB filed its
motion for summary judgment on January 22, 2024.
    NWP timely filed an opposition and also moved, under
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(d), for denial or deferral
of DB’s summary judgment motion to allow further time for
discovery. In support of the Rule 56(d) motion, counsel filed
a declaration identifying several facts NWP sought to
discover, stating that those facts were essential to NWP’s
opposition, and that, based on counsel’s information and
belief, those facts existed.
   When it filed its opposition, NWP had not pursued any
formal discovery. DB also had not made any discovery
requests, but rested its summary judgment motion on
declarations from its executives. Only after NWP filed its
opposition did it serve its first set of written discovery
requests.
    The district court denied NWP’s Rule 56(d) motion,
granted DB’s summary judgment motion, and entered
judgment in favor of DB. In denying additional time for
discovery, the court reasoned that NWP failed to provide a
basis to conclude the facts it sought to discover existed, and
further failed to conduct discovery diligently.
8     DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC


    On the merits, the district court concluded that NWP
could not show a likelihood of consumer confusion, and
therefore could not establish trademark infringement under
the Lanham Act. §§ 1114(1)(a), 1125(a)(1). In so ruling,
the district court first applied the extraterritoriality
framework laid out in Abitron, determining that DB’s
relevant conduct in the U.S. was “limited to manufacturing,
bottling, labeling, and transporting its Nature’s Day branded
supplements.” The court concluded that the transport was a
domestic “use in commerce” actionable under the Lanham
Act. See 15 U.S.C. § 1127.
    Next, the district court analyzed whether there was a
genuine issue of material fact that DB’s actionable domestic
conduct was likely to cause consumer confusion. The court
applied the Sleekcraft factors to analyze the likelihood of
confusion and concluded that the most relevant
considerations cut against NWP: (1) the lack of evidence of
actual confusion; (2) the evidence showing divergent
marketing channels used for Nature’s Way and Nature’s Day
products; and (3) the absence of evidence showing a strong
possibility of expansion.
    The court declined to analyze the remaining factors
because they were “less relevant in light of the absence of
any sales, advertising, or other interaction with United States
consumers and the fact that [DB] advertises and sells only to
consumers abroad.” The court concluded that there was “no
genuine issue of material fact that [DB’s] use of the Nature’s
Day mark for its transport in commerce is not likely to cause
consumer confusion.” Thus, there was no trademark
infringement as a matter of law.
     DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC     9


                 II. Standard of Review
    We review de novo a grant of summary judgment.
Rearden LLC v. Rearden Com., Inc., 683 F.3d 1190, 1202
(9th Cir. 2012). “Viewing the evidence in the light most
favorable to [the non-moving party], we must determine
whether there are any genuine issues of material fact and
whether the district court correctly applied the relevant
substantive law.” Id. (quotation omitted). We review for
abuse of discretion the denial of a Rule 56(d) motion.
InteliClear, LLC v. ETC Glob. Holdings, Inc., 978 F.3d 653,
661 (9th Cir. 2020).
                 III. Legal Background
    To prevail on a trademark infringement claim, a plaintiff
“must prove: (1) that it has a protectible ownership interest
in the mark; and (2) that the defendant’s use of the mark is
likely to cause consumer confusion.” Rearden, 683 F.3d at
1202 (quotation omitted). Only the latter requirement is at
issue in this appeal.
    The eight Sleekcraft factors for determining whether an
allegedly infringing use of a mark is likely to cause
consumer confusion are well-established. See JL Beverage
Co., LLC v. Jim Beam Brands Co., 828 F.3d 1098, 1106 (9th
Cir. 2016) (citing AMF Inc. v. Sleekcraft Boats, 599 F.2d
341, 348–49 (9th Cir. 1979), abrogated in part on other
grounds by Mattel, Inc. v. Walking Mountain Prods., 353
F.3d 792, 810 (9th Cir. 2003)). Unique questions arise,
however, where some or all of the allegedly infringing use
occurred outside U.S. territory, because the trademark
infringement provisions of the Lanham Act are not
extraterritorial. Abitron, 600 U.S. at 415 (citing 15 U.S.C.
§§ 1114(1)(a), 1125(a)(1)). In Abitron, the Supreme Court
held that the trademark infringement provisions of the
10    DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC


Lanham Act “extend only to claims where the claimed
infringing use in commerce is domestic.” Id. In other words,
“‘use in commerce’ provides the dividing line between
foreign and domestic applications of these Lanham Act
provisions.” Id. at 423.
                       IV. Analysis
                    A. Extraterritoriality
     The district court correctly applied Abitron in granting
summary judgment to DB. Abitron required the district
court to isolate DB’s domestic “use in commerce” of the
Nature’s Day mark from its non-actionable foreign conduct.
See id. at 419. Because DB’s conduct abroad is beyond the
scope of the Lanham Act, the court properly cabined its
inquiry to whether NWP had raised a triable factual dispute
that DB’s domestic activities—manufacturing, bottling,
labeling, and transporting in commerce Nature’s Day
supplements—were likely to cause consumer confusion. See
id. at 424.
     The district court concluded that DB’s “domestic
conduct and use of the Nature’s Day mark is actionable
under the Lanham Act[, however,] such conduct is
actionable under the Lanham Act to the extent that it is likely
to cause consumer confusion.” Despite the court’s express
ruling, NWP argues that the district court erroneously
interpreted Abitron as requiring a plaintiff to show a
“domestic likelihood of confusion to establish trademark
infringement.” According to NWP, it follows from Abitron
that “[a]ny domestic use [in commerce] . . . create[s] a
sufficient nexus with the United States to avoid
impermissible foreign application.” Thus, NWP argues that
if the court finds a domestic use in commerce, the likelihood
of confusion inquiry may proceed without regard to
      DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC       11


territorial limitations. This argument misconstrues Abitron
and the district court’s order.
    NWP is correct that Abitron did not tether the
extraterritoriality analysis to the likelihood of confusion
element of a trademark infringement claim, and held instead
that a permissible, non-extraterritorial application hinges on
the location of the “use in commerce.” Id. at 422–24.
Abitron’s territorial limitation on the trademark
infringement provisions of the Lanham Act, however,
necessarily narrows the conduct a factfinder may look to in
analyzing the likelihood of confusion, by limiting the
geographic scope of conduct capable of supporting a claim.
See id. at 415, 423. For a viable trademark infringement
claim, the challenged commercial use of a mark must be
likely to cause consumer confusion, Rearden, 683 F.3d at
1202, so the district court correctly focused its analysis on
whether NWP could show that such confusion would likely
arise from DB’s domestic conduct. The likelihood of
confusion element of a trademark infringement claim existed
before Abitron, see § 1127, and remains intact after, subject
to the limitation that the confusion-causing conduct must
occur domestically. See Abitron, 600 U.S. at 423 (“Th[e
allegedly infringing] conduct . . . must create a sufficient risk
of confusion, but confusion is not a separate requirement;
rather, it is simply a necessary characteristic of an offending
use.”).
    In Abitron, the Court “resolve[d] a Circuit split over the
extraterritorial reach of the Lanham Act.” Id. at 417. It
applied the presumption against extraterritoriality to
§ 1114(1)(a) and § 1125(a)(1), and held that the trademark
infringement provisions of the Act “are not extraterritorial”
and “extend only to claims where the claimed infringing use
in commerce is domestic.” Id. at 415.
12    DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC


     The Court articulated “a two-step framework” for
applying the longstanding principle that congressional
legislation does not apply outside U.S. territory absent a
contrary intent. Id. at 417 (citing RJR Nabisco, Inc. v.
European Cmty., 579 U.S. 325, 335–36 (2016)). Under step
one, courts must determine whether the statutory provision
at issue is extraterritorial. Id. at 417–18. If the answer is no,
the court proceeds to step two, and “resolves whether the suit
seeks a (permissible) domestic or (impermissible) foreign
application of the provision.” Id. at 418. At step two, “to
prove that a claim involves a domestic application of a
statute, plaintiffs must establish that the conduct relevant to
the statute’s focus occurred in the United States.” Id.
(emphasis and quotation omitted).
    With respect to the trademark infringement provisions of
the Lanham Act, Abitron held that they do not apply
extraterritorially at step one. Id. at 419. At step two, the
Court held that “‘use in commerce’ is the conduct relevant
to any potential focus of [the trademark infringement
provisions],” so ‘“use in commerce’ provides the dividing
line between foreign and domestic applications of [those
provisions].” Id. at 423.
    NWP’s misreading of Abitron stems from the debate
between the majority and concurring viewpoints. Although
the Court unanimously agreed that the Lanham Act
trademark infringement provisions do not apply
extraterritorially, several Justices disagreed on what
separates a permissible domestic application from an
impermissible one at step two. Id. at 424. In her
concurrence, Justice Sotomayor reasoned that the focus of
§ 1114(1)(a) and § 1125(a)(1) is consumer confusion, so
they encompass infringement likely to cause confusion
domestically, even where the infringing conduct happened
      DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC    13


entirely abroad. Id. at 432, 437 (Sotomayor, J., concurring
in the judgment). The majority, however, reasoned that the
“ultimate question regarding permissible domestic
application turns on the location of the conduct relevant to
the focus” of the statutory provision, and held that the
conduct relevant to any potential focus of the trademark
infringement provisions “is infringing use in commerce.” Id.
at 422; see also id. at 424 (reasoning that the concurrence’s
“focus-only” approach “would give the Lanham Act an
untenably broad reach”).
    In other words, the majority held that a domestic
likelihood of confusion alone could not be the basis for a
trademark infringement claim. Only a domestic use in
commerce causing a likelihood of confusion is within the
scope of the Lanham Act’s trademark infringement
provisions. See id. at 424. But this does not, as NWP argues,
give rise to the inference that confusion anywhere in the
world will do, or that a likelihood of confusion among U.S.
consumers is irrelevant or not required. In fact, in the
ordinary case, the likelihood of confusion will necessarily be
domestic in nature, because the confusion must be caused by
a stateside use in commerce.            See id. at 422–23
(“[C]onfusion . . . is simply a necessary characteristic of an
offending use.”). The district court’s focus on confusion
among U.S. consumers was thus a proper analytical response
to Abitron.
    Here, the district court found that DB’s “conduct in the
United States is limited to manufacturing, bottling, labeling,
and transporting its Nature’s Day branded supplements.” As
the Court noted in Abitron, the Lanham Act defines “use in
commerce” as “‘the bona fide use of a mark in the ordinary
course of trade,’ where the mark serves to ‘identify and
distinguish [the mark user’s] goods . . . and to indicate the
14    DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC


source of the goods.’” Id. at 428 (alterations in original)
(citing § 1127). A mark is “deemed to be in use in commerce
on goods when it is placed in any manner on the goods . . .
and the goods are sold or transported in commerce.” § 1127
(emphasis added). Because transport meets § 1127’s
definition of “use in commerce,” the district court properly
concluded that DB’s commercial uses of the mark included
domestic conduct to which liability could attach. Stated
differently, although the record evidence shows exclusively
foreign sales, NWP’s claims do not fail at the
extraterritoriality threshold given the evidence of domestic
transport.
    We thus affirm the district court’s conclusion that, in the
context of an extraterritoriality analysis under Abitron, a
mark is used in commerce when “it is placed in any manner
on . . . goods . . . and the goods are sold or transported in
commerce.” § 1127. Because “transport[]” is included in
§ 1127—the statutory provision defining “use in commerce”
cited in Abitron—we need not elaborate on other
circumstances that may constitute a “use in commerce” for
extraterritoriality purposes. See Abitron, 600 U.S. at 428 n.6
(acknowledging that Justice Jackson’s concurrence
“proposed a further elaboration of ‘use in commerce,’” but
finding “no occasion to address the precise contours of that
phrase” in the majority opinion); id. at 430 (Jackson, J.,
concurring) (citing § 1127 and proposing that a “use in
commerce . . . can occur wherever the mark serves its
source-identifying function”); see also LegalForce RAPC
Worldwide, PC v. LegalForce, Inc., 124 F.4th 1122, 1127
(9th Cir. 2024) (“The Lanham Act’s ‘use in commerce’
requirement is equivalent to its ‘in connection with’ goods
and services requirement.” (citing La Quinta Worldwide
      DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC     15


LLC v. Q.R.T.M., S.A. de C.V., 762 F.3d 867, 874 n.1 (9th
Cir. 2014))).
    In sum, the district court properly interpreted Abitron
and applied it for the limited purpose of identifying which of
DB’s activities involving the Nature’s Day mark were
actionable under the Act. Abitron did not change, and the
district court did not interpret it as changing, the legal
standard for the likelihood of consumer confusion analysis.
See Hetronic Int’l, Inc. v. Hetronic Ger. GmbH, 99 F.4th
1150, 1164–65 (10th Cir. 2024) (“[L]ikelihood of confusion
was already an essential element for any actionable Lanham
Act trademark-infringement claim, and the multi-factor test
for likelihood of confusion [in the Tenth Circuit] remains
unchanged [after Abitron].”).
                B. Likelihood of Confusion
    The district court did not err in finding that there was no
genuine factual dispute “that [DB’s] use of the Nature’s Day
mark for its transport in commerce is not likely to cause
consumer confusion.” In determining whether there is a
likelihood of consumer confusion, we apply the Sleekcraft
factors, which consider: “(1) the strength of the mark;
(2) proximity or relatedness of the goods; (3) similarity of
the marks; (4) evidence of actual confusion; (5) marketing
channels used; (6) type of goods and the degree of care likely
to be exercised by the purchaser; (7) the defendant’s intent
in selecting the mark; and (8) the likelihood of expansion of
the product lines.” JL Beverage Co., 828 F.3d at 1106.
    “The factors are non-exhaustive and applied flexibly; the
Sleekcraft factors are not intended to be a ‘rote checklist.’”
Id. (quoting Rearden, 683 F.3d at 1209). “A determination
may rest on only those factors that are most pertinent to the
particular case before [us], and other variables besides the
16    DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC


enumerated factors should also be taken into account based
on the particular circumstances.” Id. (quoting Rearden, 683
F.3d at 1209).
    Here, the factor most pertinent in determining the
likelihood of consumer confusion is the marketing channels
used. In analyzing marketing channel convergence, we
consider “how the parties advertise and market their
products” and whether “the general class of . . . purchasers
exposed to the products overlap.” Pom Wonderful LLC v.
Hubbard, 775 F.3d 1118, 1130 (9th Cir. 2014) (quoting
Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 353). Even “where there is precise
identity of a complainant’s and an alleged infringer’s mark,
there may be no consumer confusion—and thus no
trademark infringement—if the alleged infringer is in a
different geographic area or in a wholly different industry.”
Brookfield Commc’ns, Inc. v. W. Coast Ent. Corp., 174 F.3d
1036, 1054 (9th Cir. 1999).
     There is no evidence that Nature’s Way and Nature’s
Day products are marketed or sold in overlapping marketing
channels. NWP markets and sells Nature’s Way products in
all fifty states, but DB does not sell Nature’s Day products
to consumers on U.S. soil or through U.S. e-commerce
platforms, and does not market the brand in the U.S.,
“including through Doctor’s Best’s websites and social
media accounts.”
    NWP cites to a declaration from a DB sales executive
stating that DB intends to use e-commerce platforms to sell
Nature’s Day goods in Asia, to argue that we must draw the
reasonable inference that those “e-commerce platforms will
be available in the [U.S.], as websites are generally available
worldwide.” But that same declaration states that DB “has
not sold and does not intend to sell [Nature’s Day]
      DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC             17


supplements through [U.S.] brick-and-mortar or e-
commerce platforms,” and “has not advertised or marketed,
and does not intend to advertise or market, [Nature’s Day]
supplements in the [U.S], including through [DB’s] websites
and social media accounts.” NWP may not create a dispute
over this evidentiary statement with assertions of “mere
speculation.” See Surfvivor Media, Inc. v. Survivor Prods.,
406 F.3d 625, 634 (9th Cir. 2005) (superseded by statute on
other grounds).
    Given the undisputed facts, the marketing channels
factor is the Sleekcraft factor that best integrates Abitron’s
bar on extraterritorial applications of the relevant provisions
into our longstanding trademark infringement framework.
Although DB’s domestic transport of the Nature’s Day
supplements brings NWP’s claim within the territorial scope
of the Lanham Act, given the record in this case, a reasonable
jury could not conclude that consumer confusion is likely, in
large part because there is no material overlap in the
marketing channels used to promote Nature’s Way and
Nature’s Day products. 3
    Further, in light of the summary judgment record, a
rational jury could not find “a strong possibility of expansion
into competing markets.” M2 Software, Inc. v. Madacy Ent.,
421 F.3d 1073, 1085 (9th Cir. 2005) (emphasis and quotation
omitted). With regard to its future plans, DB presented
evidence that it “does not intend to sell Nature’s Day
[s]upplements in brick-and-mortar stores” or to “end
consumers in the United States” through any means. NWP

3
  Although the non-consumer-facing domestic transport ultimately
cannot support liability here, we do not foreclose the possibility that
there may be unique circumstances where transport alone in the U.S. may
possibly cause consumer confusion.
18     DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC


points to the uncontested evidence that DB manufactures
Nature’s Day products in the U.S., is seeking a U.S.
trademark registration, and the products are labelled in
English with the disclaimers required by U.S. law. While
these facts support the inference that DB could easily begin
selling Nature’s Day products in the U.S., a rational jury
could not find a strong possibility of expansion into the U.S.
market given DB’s undisputed evidence of its foreign
marketing and business intentions.
    One of DB’s executives filed a declaration explaining
that: (1) DB’s supplements are manufactured in the U.S. and
labeled in English because DB believes that U.S. products
are perceived as high-quality and safe by foreign consumers;
and (2) DB uses U.S.-regulatory-compliant labels because
U.S. law requires such for U.S. manufactured goods,
regardless of where the end user is located. NWP could have
sought to depose that witness during discovery, but did not.
Thus, on this record, a reasonable jury could not conclude
that DB’s stated reason for the American appearance of its
Nature’s Day supplements is false, nor could a rational jury
find that DB’s express intention to market and sell the
products solely abroad is disingenuous. Even drawing all
rational inferences in NWP’s favor, NWP has not raised a
genuine issue of material fact as to the likelihood of
expansion. And because the record raises no genuine issues
of material fact as to (1) overlapping marketing channels or
(2) likely expansion into the U.S. market, no reasonable jury
could find a likelihood of consumer confusion in this case. 4


4
  In addition to the marketing channels and expansion factors, the district
court also relied on the lack of evidence of actual confusion amongst
consumers in finding no genuine issue of material fact as to the
likelihood of confusion. We need not address this factor because we
       DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC                 19


    Despite the district court’s narrow ruling, NWP
maintains that the district court erred in concluding that five
of the eight factors were “less relevant in light of the absence
of any sales, advertising, or other interaction with United
States consumers and the fact that [DB] advertises and sells
only to consumers abroad.” In NWP’s view, this was
problematic because the factors the district court found “less
relevant” were the factors that favored NWP. We assume
without deciding that NWP raised genuine issues of material
fact that the Nature’s Way mark is commercially strong;
Nature’s Way and Nature’s Day products are related goods;
the marks are facially similar; and consumers of nutritional
supplements are careless buyers. See JL Beverage Co., 828
F.3d at 1106 (listing the eight Sleekcraft factors). 5 But we
have long recognized that “the relative importance of each
individual factor [is] case-specific,” and these factors are
indeed largely irrelevant to determining the likelihood of
consumer confusion in this case. Brookfield Commc’ns, 174
F.3d at 1054.
    Regardless of how easily confusable the products and
marks are, given the summary judgment record, no
reasonable jury could find a likelihood of consumer


conclude that the absence of evidence of (1) overlapping marketing
channels or (2) a strong possibility of expansion is sufficient to support
the district court’s ruling on the likelihood of consumer confusion.
5
  Because NWP failed to produce any non-speculative evidence that DB
intentionally copied its mark, there is no genuine issue of material fact
as to DB’s permissible motives as the alleged infringer, which generally
cuts against a likelihood of confusion. See JL Beverage Co., LLC v. Jim
Beam Brands Co., 828 F.3d 1098, 1111–12 (9th Cir. 2016). But, like the
other factors the district court found unimportant, DB’s motives are
largely irrelevant, as it represents that it intends to only market and sell
Nature’s Day supplements in Asian markets.
20    DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC


confusion because DB’s Nature’s Day products do not reach
consumers domestically. See id. Because there is no
genuine issue of material fact that (1) Nature’s Way and
Nature’s Day products are not advertised or sold in
overlapping marketing channels and (2) there is not a strong
possibility that they will be in the future, it is unlikely that a
consumer will ever encounter both products in a single
commercial setting. Therefore, although the marks are
hypothetically confusable, the likelihood of consumer
confusion, given the existing record, is nonexistent, because
the marks do not appear in the same marketplace. Cf.
Rearden, 683 F.3d at 1209.
    In sum, applying the Sleekcraft factors flexibly and in
light of the extraterritorial aspects of this case, we agree with
the district court that there is no genuine issue of material
fact as to the likelihood of consumer confusion on the
existing record. Even assuming that the Nature’s Way mark
is strong, and that the goods and marks here are abstractly
similar, related, and subject to a low degree of consumer
care, a reasonable jury could not rationally find a likelihood
of consumer confusion because Nature’s Way and Nature’s
Day products are not marketed or sold in competing markets.
                        C. Rule 56(d)
    Rule 56(d) is “a device for litigants to avoid summary
judgment when they have not had sufficient time to develop
affirmative evidence.” Stevens v. Corelogic, Inc., 899 F.3d
666, 678 (9th Cir. 2018) (quoting United States v. Kitsap
Physicians Serv., 314 F.3d 995, 1000 (9th Cir. 2002)); Fed.
R. Civ. P. 56(d). District courts have discretion to deny a
Rule 56(d) motion when the nonmovant has failed to
diligently pursue discovery. Pfingston v. Ronan Eng’g Co.,
284 F.3d 999, 1005 (9th Cir. 2002). The district court did
      DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC       21


not abuse its discretion in denying NWP’s Rule 56(d)
motion.
    At the time NWP filed its Rule 56(d) motion, litigation
had been ongoing for over nine months, the evidence at the
center of DB’s summary judgment motion had been in the
record for over five months, and the close of all discovery
was less than four months away. Nonetheless, NWP had not
made a single discovery request. Further, DB provided
NWP notice of the impending motion nearly a month in
advance of filing, and NWP stipulated to a briefing schedule
despite taking no steps to elicit the facts that it believed were
necessary to oppose the motion. We thus agree with the
district court that NWP did not act diligently.
    Nor did the district court abuse its discretion by denying
deferral and granting DB’s motion prior to the date set for
the close of discovery in the court’s scheduling order.
Unlike cases where we have found an abuse of discretion
because the district court granted summary judgment before
the nonmoving party had “any realistic opportunity to pursue
discovery,” here, NWP had five months to conduct
discovery prior to requesting deferral and did not do so. See,
e.g., Burlington N. Santa Fe R.R. Co. v. Assiniboine & Sioux
Tribes of Fort Peck Rsrv., 323 F.3d 767, 773–74 (9th Cir.
2003).
    For all the above reasons, the district court’s judgment is
    AFFIRMED.
22       DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC


IKUTA, J., specially concurring

    I concur in the result. I write separately to provide my
understanding regarding the application of Abitron Austria
GmbH v. Hetronic International, Inc., 600 U.S. 412 (2023),
and the likelihood of domestic consumer confusion.
Because there was no domestic use of the Nature’s Day mark
in commerce that caused consumer confusion, the district
court did not err in granting summary judgment to Doctor’s
Best, Inc. (Doctor’s Best).
     The Lanham Act provides that there is trademark
infringement if a person “use[s] in commerce” any
“colorable imitation of a registered mark in connection with”
a sale or other conduct. 15 U.S.C. § 1114(1)(a). The
Lanham Act also provides that “a mark shall be deemed to
be in use in commerce” if the goods which display the mark
“are sold or transported in commerce.” Id. § 1127. Abitron
held that § 1114(1)(a) does not apply extraterritorially. 600
U.S. at 415. Instead, this provision “extend[s] only to claims
where the claimed infringing use in commerce is domestic.”
Id. 1 For a trademark infringement claim to be actionable,
the domestic use in commerce must create “a sufficient risk
of confusion,” which is a “necessary characteristic of an
offending use.” Id. at 423. In short, to succeed on a Lanham
Act claim under § 1114(1)(a), a plaintiff must show both
(1) use in domestic commerce, and (2) a sufficient risk of
consumer confusion.
   Here, the parties agree that Nature’s Day branded
supplements were used in domestic commerce, because
Doctor’s Best domestically transported its Nature’s Day
branded supplements. Because transportation is a “use in

1
    The same rule applies to § 1125(a)(1), which is not applicable here.
     DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC    23


commerce” under the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1127,
Doctor’s Best used the Nature’s Day mark in commerce.
    Therefore, we turn to the second prong of the Lanham
Act analysis, whether there is a sufficient risk of consumer
confusion. Nature’s Way Products (NWP) argues that if
Nature’s Day domestically used an infringing mark “in
commerce,” then there can be a Lanham Act violation if
there is consumer confusion abroad, even if there is no
consumer confusion in the United States.
     This is contrary to Abitron. 600 U.S. at 423. Abitron
explained that consumer confusion is a “necessary
characteristic of an offending use.” Id. For a Lanham Act
claim to be actionable, the offending use must occur
domestically Id. at 415. Because the offending use must be
domestic, it follows that the consumer confusion resulting
from this use likewise must be domestic. Id. at 422–23. That
is, the Lanham Act only applies where there is a domestic
use in commerce that would cause a domestic likelihood of
confusion. Accordingly, the possibility of consumer
confusion based on marketing or sales abroad is irrelevant to
this case.
    NWP also argues that there is evidence of domestic
consumer confusion. This argument fails. There is no
evidence in the record to suggest that domestic consumers
would encounter the “Nature’s Day” mark during transport.
Moreover, Doctor’s Best presented uncontested evidence
that it has not sold, marketed, or advertised Nature’s Day
supplements to end consumers in the United States and has
no plans to do so in the future. Because there is no evidence
that domestic consumers would encounter the “Nature’s
Day” mark during transport, domestic consumers
necessarily cannot confuse Doctor’s Best’s “Nature’s Day”
24   DOCTOR’S BEST, INC. V. NATURE’S WAY PRODUCTS, LLC


products with NWP’s “Nature’s Way” products. Thus, there
is no genuine issue of material fact that Doctor’s Best’s
domestic conduct causes a likelihood of confusion for
domestic consumers. See Brookfield Commc’ns, Inc. v. W.
Coast Ent. Corp., 174 F.3d 1036, 1056 (9th Cir. 1999).
    In sum, Doctor’s Best’s transport of Nature’s Day
supplements in the United States constitutes a domestic use
in commerce. But the evidence in the record does not create
a genuine issue of material fact as to whether this transport
causes a likelihood of domestic consumer confusion. And,
under Abitron, we do not consider extraterritorial consumer
confusion. Accordingly, the district court did not err in
granting summary judgment in favor of Doctor’s Best.