United States Court of Appeals
                     For the First Circuit


No. 24-1458

                           JOHN DOE,

                     Plaintiff, Appellant,

                               v.

  UNIVERSITY OF MASSACHUSETTS; TRUSTEES FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF
 MASSACHUSETTS; HANNAH MONBLEAU, in her official and individual
     capacities; KATE LEGEE, in her official and individual
 capacities; ESMERALDA LEVESQUE, in her official and individual
capacities, a/k/a Esmeralda Mendez; ADAM DUNBAR, in his official
                   and individual capacities,

                     Defendants, Appellees,

                         BRETT SOKOLOW,

                           Defendant.


          APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
               FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

          [Hon. William G. Young, U.S. District Judge]


                             Before

                    Montecalvo and Kayatta,*
                        Circuit Judges.




     *  Judge Selya heard oral argument in this case and
participated in the initial semble thereafter.  His death on
February 22, 2025, ended his involvement in this case.   The
remaining two panelists issued this opinion pursuant to
28 U.S.C. § 46(d).
     Ilya I. Feoktistov, with whom Law Office of Ilya Feoktistov
was on brief, for appellant.

     Michael Hoven, Associate Counsel, Office of the General
Counsel, University of Massachusetts, with whom Andrea Joy
Campbell, Attorney General of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
Denise Barton, Special Assistant Attorney General, and Julia Low,
Associate Counsel, Office of the General Counsel, University of
Massachusetts, were on brief, for appellees.


                          July 25, 2025
              MONTECALVO, Circuit Judge.       In 2023, the University of

Massachusetts ("the University") found John Doe1 -- a graduate

student and resident advisor ("RA") at the University's Lowell

campus -- responsible for sexual misconduct and sanctioned him

accordingly.     Doe responded by filing a complaint in federal court

against the University, its trustees, and the members of the

hearing panel who handled his case.             Doe alleged, among other

things, that the University deprived him of his First Amendment

rights   by    punishing   him   for    protected   speech   and   expressive

conduct.      About two months after filing his complaint, Doe moved

for a preliminary injunction.             With the parties' consent, and

pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 65, the district court

considered the matter on a "case stated" basis wherein the court

consolidates the preliminary injunction hearing with the trial on

the merits and the parties present the case to the court on the

undisputed facts in the pre-trial record.           Following that hearing,

the district court ruled against Doe, finding that his First

Amendment rights had not been violated.         Doe timely appealed.      For

the reasons below, we reverse in part and affirm in part.




     1  Plaintiff-appellant is proceeding by pseudonym.   Other
students will be referred to by their initials to protect their
privacy.


                                       - 3 -
                                I. Factual Background

                    A. Initial Complaints and Investigation

                  In May 2023, four female RAs at the University -- J.T.,

C.T.,2 E.H., and E.Z.3 -- reported concerns to their supervisor

about Doe's interaction with female RAs.              Their concerns, followed

by   formal        complaints    by   J.T.,   C.T.,   and    E.H.,   prompted     the

University to suspend Doe from his RA duties and investigate his

alleged misconduct.

                  The University appointed defendant Hannah Monbleau, the

Assistant Director of Student Life and Well-Being, to conduct the

investigation to "gather[] evidence to allow the University to

determine         whether    [Doe] . . . violat[ed]         the   Student   Conduct

Code['s]" prohibition on "[s]exual misconduct."                       In pertinent

part,       the    Student   Conduct   Code   defines   sexual       misconduct    as

"unwelcomed conduct of a sexual nature when . . . such conduct

unreasonably[] interferes with a . . . person's work or academic

performance; interferes with or limits a person or person's ability

to participate in or benefit from a work or academic program or




        The district court's order variously refers to this student
        2

as C.T. and C.T.Z. We refer to her only as C.T.
        Although E.Z. reported concerns about Doe to her
        3

supervisor, she did not file a formal complaint against him and
did not participate in the University's investigation of Doe's
alleged behavior.


                                        - 4 -
activity;    or   creates      an    intimidating,        hostile,      or   offensive

working or academic environment."

            In the course of the investigation, Monbleau interviewed

J.T.,    C.T.,    and   E.H.,       as   well     as   additional    students     they

recommended to her, including S.K. and G.D. After S.K.'s interview

with Monbleau, she, too, filed a formal complaint against Doe.

Monbleau also twice interviewed Doe and spoke on one occasion to

another student, A.M., on Doe's recommendation.                      Monbleau then

compiled the information she gathered from these interviews in a

document     titled      the     "Student         Rights     &    Responsibilities

Investigative Report."          The report concluded that Doe's conduct

met the Student Conduct Code's definition of sexual misconduct.

Once she finalized the report, the University sent it to Doe, who

then filed a written response.                Monbleau, in turn, filed a reply.

            Next, pursuant to the "Student Conduct process," Doe's

case was assigned to a three-member panel of University officials

(the "Conduct Panel").           The Conduct Panel -- comprised of Kate

Legee, Director of Student Conduct and Prevention; Adam Dunbar,

Senior    Associate     Director         of   Student    Affairs;    and     Esmeralda

Levesque, River Hawk Scholars Academy Coordinator (collectively,

the     "Individual     Defendants") -- was             tasked   with    determining

whether Doe had engaged in sexual misconduct (as defined by the

Student Conduct Code).          In doing so, the Conduct Panel considered

Monbleau's report, Doe's response, and Monbleau's corresponding


                                          - 5 -
reply, and held a hearing on August 22, 2023, at which C.T., J.T.,

S.K., and G.D. testified.4

                    B. The Conduct Panel's Decision

           Following      the   hearing,    the   Conduct    Panel   issued   a

written decision in a document titled the "Panel Deliberation

Form." There the Conduct Panel first identified the charge against

Doe: engaging in sexual misconduct as defined by the Student

Conduct   Code.     The    charge   is   followed   by   a   section   labeled

"Material findings of fact."5        Next, the Conduct Panel set forth

its ultimate conclusion that Doe was "[r]esponsible" for sexual

misconduct.       That conclusion was immediately followed by the

Conduct Panel's rationale.

                          1. Doe's Alleged Conduct6

           The Conduct Panel identified the following conduct as

the basis for its determination that Doe was responsible for sexual


     4  As the district court noted below, we do not have the
benefit of the transcript, or any other record, from the Conduct
Panel's hearing on August 22, 2023, other than the information
included in the "Panel Deliberation Form." We also note that Doe
did not attend the hearing.
     5  We pause to note the misleading nature of this heading.
While the section identifies undisputed and disputed facts, it
makes no findings as to the veracity of any disputed allegations.
Rather, it merely recites the complainants' allegations against
Doe, Doe's admissions as to some, and his denials as to others.
     6  In reviewing First Amendment claims, we consider only the
government actor's contemporaneous rationale for its action, and
not any post hoc rationalizations.    See Norris ex rel. A.M. v.
Cape Elizabeth Sch. Dist., 969 F.3d 12, 25-26, 30 (1st Cir. 2020).



                                    - 6 -
misconduct:       three     verbal   comments      that    Doe   made    to    three

individuals (G.D., C.T., and S.K.), one isolated physical act (that

Doe adjusted the position of J.T.'s feet on a piece of exercise

equipment), and one repeated physical act (that Doe would extend

his arms towards J.T. to invite or initiate a hug).                     The Conduct

Panel's rationale also discussed the impact that Doe's behavior

had   on   G.D.,    C.T.,    S.K.,   and    J.T.     The   specifics      of   those

allegations are laid out below.7

                          i. Alleged Statement to G.D.

             In    her      interview      with    Monbleau,     G.D. -- another

university    student -- reported that,            sometime during the 2022

spring semester, she and Doe "were cooking together" and discussing

Jehovah's Witnesses and religious proselytizing when "Doe said 'Oh

[G.D.] do you want me to shove my penis in your face?' [and G.D.]

said 'what?!'"       Doe repeated the statement and "said that [the

question] is like what Jehovah's Witness folks do," they "shov[e]

their beliefs in your face."            When interviewed, Doe asserted, as

he does now, that he made the comment to "compare unwanted sexual

conduct to religious proselytism . . . and meant to do so in




Thus, in recounting the pertinent facts we focus on the conduct
and speech the Conduct Panel identified as the basis for its
sanction.
      7 The Conduct Panel labeled the evidence concerning other
alleged misconduct "discrepant," and it made no findings
concerning these other allegations.


                                        - 7 -
disagreement with both."    In its rationale, the Conduct Panel

accepted Doe's assertion and "assumed as fact" that "context of

intent."   But even with that context assumed, it found that the

comment was "unwelcome."

           Relatedly, G.D. initially told Monbleau that she "[d]id

not really think about [the interaction] much until she heard about

what had happened with her peers."      But at the August 22, 2023

hearing, G.D. testified that Doe's comment "caused her to feel

fear and confusion about [Doe]'s intent in the moment."

                  ii. Alleged Statement to C.T.

           C.T. told Monbleau that while she and Doe were on RA

duty together and talking about food, Doe said, "if the food is

good, I'd have sex while eating."     Doe told Monbleau that he did

not remember using the word "sex" but that he may have.     Rather,

he asserted that C.T. "may have misunderstood what he was saying

in regard to food, and that he may have been speaking similar to

the popular hashtag #foodporn."   The Conduct Panel's decision did

not make a finding as to what Doe said.

           Asked how Doe's comment impacted her job or academics,

C.T. replied, "[i]t's awkward" and that "[i]t was awkward when she

was experiencing [the alleged behavior] but it's more awkward now

that they [-- i.e., Doe and another male RA, K.G. --] know [that

complaints had been made against them.]"      In its decision, the

Conduct Panel also wrote that C.T. "indicated that [she] w[as] not


                              - 8 -
comfortable    interacting    with    [Doe]   any    longer,   and     that    the

interactions     impacted    [her]    ability   to     work    [her]    student

employment position[] at UMass Lowell."             The evidence supporting

that finding, however, was limited to C.T.'s statement that it was

"awkward"     to experience Doe's conduct           and that it      was "more

awkward" once he learned that she had filed a complaint against

him.

                    iii. Alleged Statement to S.K.

            S.K.'s complaint against Doe also stemmed from a time

she and Doe were on RA duty together.               S.K. told Monbleau that

during the shift in question Doe was "talkative and started going

off about dating apps" and "started venting about how he's going

to be alone forever."       S.K. reported that Doe then said, "I don't

need someone to have sex with, I just want someone to cuddle with,"

and "I'll be alone, so I'll just jerk off and go to bed."                     Doe,

however, admitted only to saying, "I don't need to [sic] someone

to have sex with."      The Conduct Panel's decision again did not

make a finding regarding what was said.             Rather, it implied that

the Conduct Panel relied only on the statement that Doe admitted

to making.8


       8In its rationale, the Conduct Panel concluded that Doe's
"comment [to S.K.] was not welcome."           The use of the
singular -- "comment" -- suggests   that   the    Conduct  Panel
considered only the statement Doe admitted to in reaching its
determination that he engaged in sexual misconduct as defined by
the Student Conduct Code.


                                     - 9 -
              S.K. told Monbleau that she thought that the comments

were "[i]nappropriate in the workplace," made her feel "really

uncomfortable" and "in shock," and that she did "not want to work

with [Doe] again." The Conduct Panel's rationale states that Doe's

comment      was    "not   welcome"   and   caused     S.K.    to   "le[ave]     the

room . . . to avoid [Doe]'s conduct, and [to] ask[] to not be on

duty with [Doe] afterward."

                   iv. Alleged Physical Acts Involving J.T.

              The Conduct Panel's rationale also cited two physical

acts -- one singular and one recurring -- involving J.T.                    First,

J.T. reported that on one occasion Doe moved her feet with his own

to adjust her stance on a piece of exercise equipment located in

Doe's    dorm      room.    Second,    J.T.    told    Monbleau     that,   on   an

unspecified number of occasions, Doe extended his arms towards

J.T. to initiate or invite a hug, which caused her to feel

"obligated to engage."           Doe admitted to the hugs but contended

that    no   one,    including   J.T.,   ever   said    that    his    "hugs   were

unwelcome."        The Conduct Panel's rationale nonetheless stated that

both instances of Doe's conduct were unwelcome and that, with

respect      to    Doe   adjusting    J.T.'s   feet,    "no    party   noted     any

conversation asking for consent."

              When asked "[h]ow . . . the discomfort [she] felt" due

to Doe's conduct "impacted [her] job/academics," J.T. reported

that her discomfort caused "[n]ot too bad of an impact on her job"


                                      - 10 -
but that she "d[id not] want to be alone with [Doe]" and "would be

more   uncomfortable"   if    "it    was    just    her    and   him."       In   its

rationale, the Conduct Panel stated that Doe's behavior caused

J.T. to "not [be] comfortable interacting with [Doe] any longer,

and that the interactions impacted [her] ability to work [her job]

at   UMass   Lowell."   The    only       factual   support      for   the   latter

assertion, however, was J.T.'s statement that the "discomfort

[she] felt" caused "[n]ot too bad of an impact on her job" and

that she did not want to be alone with him.

                  2. The Conduct Panel's Conclusion

             Based on these allegations, the Conduct Panel concluded

that Doe's actions "created a working environment in an academic

setting that was offensive for multiple female students" and that

"[a] reasonable person would find comments of a sexual nature in

the academic living and working environment to be offensive."

Indeed, the Conduct Panel expressly stated that its ultimate

conclusion -- that Doe engaged in sexual misconduct as defined by

the Student Conduct Code -- was based on its finding that his

comments were offensive.            It also stated that            Doe's actions

"constitute[d] a pervasive pattern of unwelcome conduct related to

sex directed to female students."             The Conduct Panel therefore

imposed sanctions, including permanently banning Doe from living

in   campus-provided    housing      or    entering       any    residence    hall,




                                    - 11 -
notifying campus police of the ban, and placing Doe on "elevated

probation" through his graduation.

                             II. Procedural History

             The Conduct Panel sent Doe its written decision on

September     7,    2023,    and    Doe     filed   suit   in    federal   court    in

Massachusetts on September 10, 2023.                  In pertinent part, Doe's

complaint charged the University, its trustees ("Trustees"), and

the    Individual     Defendants          (collectively,        "defendants")     with

unlawfully depriving him of his First Amendment rights in violation

of    42   U.S.C.   § 1983    and     the    Massachusetts       Civil   Rights    Act

("MCRA"), Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 12, §§ 11H, 11I, and sought monetary

and equitable relief. Doe later moved for a preliminary injunction

first against the University and its Trustees and then against

defendant Kate Legee in her capacity as chair of the Conduct Panel.9

             With the parties' consent, the district court collapsed

Doe's motion for a preliminary injunction with a trial on the

merits pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 65. The parties

also agreed to proceed on a "case stated" basis, in which the

parties "present the case to the court on the undisputed facts in

the pre-trial record."             TLT Constr. Corp. v. RI, Inc., 484 F.3d



       9Upon Doe's filing of his motion for a preliminary
injunction as to Kate Legee, the district court entered a text
order terminating as moot Doe's initial preliminary injunction
motion as to the University of Massachusetts and the Trustees
thereof.


                                          - 12 -
130, 135 n.6 (1st Cir. 2007).           In that posture, the district court

is "entitled to 'engage in a certain amount of factfinding,

including   the     drawing   of     inferences.'"         Id.   (quoting       United

Paperworkers Int'l Union Loc. 14 v. Int'l Paper Co., 64 F.3d 28,

31 (1st Cir. 1995)).             The case stated hearing took place on

February 5, 2024.        For reasons not germane to this appeal, Doe's

case went forward only on Doe's charge alleging violation of his

First Amendment rights, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983, and his

charge alleging violation of the MCRA.

            On April 9, 2024, the district court issued an order

setting forth its Findings of Fact and Rulings of Law.                  In it, the

district court adopted the parties' joint statement of undisputed

facts, including the Student Conduct Code's definition of sexual

misconduct, the timeline of Monbleau's investigation, and the

chronology of proceedings before the Conduct Panel.                     The order

quoted the Conduct Panel's decision at length, but the district

court    disclaimed      agreement      with   any   of   the    Conduct    Panel's

findings, stating that it "ma[de] no finding or ruling as to

whether    it would have made similar findings                   [as the    Conduct

Panel]."

            Turning to questions of law, the district court held

that    Doe's    section 1983      claim   alleging       deprivation      of    First

Amendment       rights   could     be    brought     against     the    Individual

Defendants only in their official capacities and that his potential


                                        - 13 -
remedies were limited to prospective injunctive and declaratory

relief.10          Addressing the merits of Doe's First Amendment claim,

the district court applied the standard established by the Supreme

Court        in    Tinker    v.     Des   Moines     Independent   Community    School

District, 393 U.S. 503 (1969), for evaluating such claims in the

public-school context.               The district court held that Doe's claim

failed        because       the   University -- acting        through   the    Conduct

Panel -- reasonably determined                 or forecast that Doe's conduct

(1) caused a substantial disruption, (2) would cause a substantial

disruption of school activities, and (3) invaded the rights of

others.           The district court further held that even if Doe's First

Amendment          claim    could    succeed    on    the   merits,   the   Individual

Defendants          were    entitled      to   qualified    immunity    for   monetary

damages.          Doe v. Univ. of Mass., No. 23-12077, 2024 WL 1521758, at

*9 (D. Mass. Apr. 9, 2024).                The district court also held that the

Eleventh Amendment barred Doe's claims against the University and


        The district court also held that Doe's section 1983 claim
        10

could be brought against the Trustees in their individual
capacities. Yet Doe's complaint did not purport to do so.
     Additionally, although Doe does not appeal the district
court's holding that his section 1983 claim could be brought only
against the Individual Defendants, his briefing on appeal refers
to defendants generally as "UMass Lowell." The defendants note
that incongruity in their opposition but nonetheless present their
arguments on behalf of "Appellees," who they define as including
all named defendants.    We will follow the defendants' lead and
refer collectively to the named defendants as "defendants,"
although Doe's appeal pertains to the district court's holding
only as to the Individual Defendants.


                                            - 14 -
his claim alleging violation of the MCRA.           Id. at *7, *13.      Doe

timely noticed his appeal.     Before us, he challenges the district

court's   judgment   only   with   respect   to   its   finding   that   his

section 1983 claim failed on the merits and that the Individual

Defendants were entitled to qualified immunity as to his request

for money damages.

                       III. Standard of Review

           As we noted above, the district court decided this case

at summary judgment pursuant to the "case stated" procedure. Under

our precedent, this procedure may be used in "somewhat unusual

cases" "when the basic dispute between the parties concerns only

the factual inferences that one might draw from the more basic

facts to which the parties have agreed."          United Paperworkers, 64

F.3d at 31.    In deciding the case, the district court "engage[s]

in a certain amount of factfinding, including the drawing of

inferences."    Brotherston v. Putnam Invs., LLC, 907 F.3d 17, 24

(1st Cir. 2018) (quoting Pac. Indem. Co. v. Deming, 828 F.3d 19,

22 (1st Cir. 2016)).

           On appeal, "[i]n reviewing the entry of summary judgment

on a case-stated record, we review legal questions de novo and

factual determinations for clear error."          Id. at 24-25.   In other

words, to prevail before us Doe must establish either that the

district court's "factual determinations are clearly erroneous or




                                   - 15 -
[that] the district court made an error of law."                           Watson v.

Deaconess Waltham Hosp., 298 F.3d 102, 108 (1st Cir. 2002).

                                    IV. Discussion

             We begin with three important caveats to bear in mind

when reading or applying this opinion.               First, even though Doe's

alleged misconduct included touching another student's feet and

greeting that student with unwanted hugs, both parties' briefs

treat that conduct as expression protected by the First Amendment.

The district court's decision did not assess whether Doe's alleged

misconduct was a form of speech.           Taking the record as we find it,

and accepting the framing of the issues as presented by the

parties, we too shall assume that all the conduct at issue is

speech.

             Second,      notwithstanding       that   Doe     was    an    RA,   the

defendants did not argue below or on appeal that we should regard

the    University's          relationship       with     Doe     as        that   of

employer-employee. Rather, both sides contend that we should treat

the   case   as     one   of   student     discipline     and    apply      Tinker's

three-prong       analysis     of    student-speech     restrictions,        subject

to -- Doe argues -- adjustment because the students in this case

are all adults.

             Third, we also do not understand defendants to argue

that any of Doe's conduct, collectively or separately, falls within

any recognized exceptions to First Amendment protection other than


                                       - 16 -
Tinker.   To    the   extent    that   defendants   disagree,    any   such

contention is waived for lack of development.            See United States

v. Zannino, 895 F.2d 1, 17 (1st Cir. 1990) ("[I]ssues adverted to

in a perfunctory manner, unaccompanied by some effort at developed

argumentation, are deemed waived.").

          The narrow question we are left to decide, then, is

whether -- assuming that Doe's conduct enjoyed First Amendment

protection -- Tinker permitted defendants to punish that conduct.

With that in mind, we turn to Doe's First Amendment claim and

Tinker's familiar framework.

                  A. Doe's First Amendment Claim

          The Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment prohibits

the government from "abridging the freedom of speech." U.S. Const.

amend. I; see also Cantwell v. Connecticut, 310 U.S. 296, 303

(1940) (applying this prohibition to states and their political

subdivisions through the Fourteenth Amendment).            Its protections

extend to public schools and the students who attend them. Tinker,

393 U.S. at 506 (explaining that students do not "shed their

constitutional rights to freedom of speech or expression at the

schoolhouse   gate").    But,    because   of   public    schools'   unique

characteristics, in certain "carefully restricted circumstances,"

schools may "reasonabl[y] regulat[e]" speech that would otherwise

be protected.   Id. at 513.




                                  - 17 -
                               1. The Tinker Standard

               In Tinker, the Supreme Court established the standard to

evaluate whether public school officials' regulation of student

speech violates students' First Amendment rights.                     Id. at 512-13.

While acknowledging that student speech is generally protected,

Tinker       held   that   a   school   may   restrict      student     speech   that

(1) "materially        disrupts       classwork      or     involves    substantial

disorder" or (2) "inva[des] . . . the rights of others."11                    Id. at

513.        Public school officials may not suppress "expression that

does not interfere with a class (such as by straying from the

topic, interrupting the teacher or other students, etc.)" unless

one of Tinker's prongs is satisfied.                 Mahanoy Area Sch. Dist. v.

B.L.     ex    rel.   Levy,     594   U.S.    180,    201    (2021)    (Alito,    J.,

concurring).

               Along with identifying what speech may be restricted,

Tinker and its progeny also inform which facts bear on our review.

To begin, as noted, we consider only the school's contemporaneous


       11The Supreme Court has used various formulations to refer
to the first prong of this test. See, e.g., Tinker, 393 U.S. at
513 ("materially disrupts classwork or involves substantial
disorder"); id. ("materially and substantially disrupt[s] the work
and discipline of the school"); Healy v. James, 408 U.S. 169, 189
("substantial threat of material disruption"); Mahanoy Area Sch.
Dist. v. B.L. ex rel. Levy, 594 U.S. 180, 192 (2021) ("'substantial
disruption' of a school activity").     Because the parties treat
"material" and "substantial" as synonymous for purposes of the
Tinker analysis, we here use the term "substantial disruption,"
consistent with the Supreme Court's language in Mahanoy, 594 U.S.
at 192.


                                        - 18 -
justifications for restricting student speech.                         Norris, 969 F.3d

at 25-26, 30.       In so doing, however, we consider all the "relevant

facts" known to the school at the time the school acted, id. at

30,   and    "the        special       characteristics"          of    the     particular

educational environment, Healy v. James, 408 U.S. 169, 180 (1972)

(quoting         Tinker,        393         U.S.   at     506).              The   latter

requirement -- accounting                   for    the    particular          educational

environment -- reflects               the    commonsense       view    that    speech   or

conduct that is highly disruptive in one context may pass without

notice in another.             See, e.g., Hazelwood Sch. Dist. v. Kuhlmeier,

484 U.S. 260, 272 (1988) (noting that discussing "the existence of

Santa Claus" may be disruptive "in an elementary school setting"

while "the particulars of teenage sexual activity" may be similarly

"sensitive" in "a high school setting").                       We therefore pause to

consider     a     few     characteristics            unique     to    the    educational

environment at a public university.

             We begin with the oft cited observation that a public

university       and     its    "surrounding          environs    is    peculiarly      the

'marketplace of ideas.'" Healy, 408 U.S. at 180 (quoting Keyishian

v. Bd. of Regents, 385 U.S. 589, 603 (1967)).                     And while there are

many characteristics that distinguish the educational environment

of a university from that found at a public elementary or high

school, perhaps the most salient (and obvious) to our discussion

is the relative maturity of the students.


                                             - 19 -
             While there are undoubtedly exceptions, most university

students are at least eighteen years old.          As such, they are "young

adults" who, importantly, "are less impressionable than younger

students."     Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263, 274 n.14 (1981); see

also Tilton v. Richardson, 403 U.S. 672, 686 (1971) ("There is

substance    to   the    contention    that    college    students   are   less

impressionable          and     less        susceptible      to      religious

indoctrination.").       Their relative maturity, in turn, undermines

an argument frequently cited to justify restrictions on younger

students' speech: the need to protect them from "exposure to"

speech deemed harmful.         Bethel Sch. Dist. No. 403 v. Fraser, 478

U.S. 675, 684-85 (1986); see also Keefe v. Geanakos, 418 F.2d 359,

361-62 (1st Cir. 1969) ("A high school senior is not devoid of all

discrimination or resistance [to offensive speech].").

             Thus,   when     considering     whether    certain   conduct   is

disruptive or invasive of the rights of others, we do so keeping

in mind that these events took place on a university campus and

involved interactions between university students.12

             Finally, our review of Doe's First Amendment claim is

objective, meaning we ask whether it was reasonable for the school


     12 While the residential context of Doe's conduct might also
constitute a "special characteristic" of the school environment,
Healy, 408 U.S. at 180, the parties do not argue that anything
about the dormitory environment made the University's disciplinary
decisions more or less reasonable vis-a-vis Tinker's legal
analysis. We therefore do not consider that issue here.


                                    - 20 -
to conclude -- based on its contemporaneous justifications -- that

a student's conduct did, or would, cause a substantial disruption

or invade the rights of others.             Norris, 969 F.3d at 25.       And

because courts lack "on-the-ground expertise," we will defer to a

school's decision if it is reasonable under the circumstances.

Christian Legal Soc'y Chapter of the Univ. of Cal., Hastings Coll.

of the Law v. Martinez, 561 U.S. 661, 686 (2010); Norris, 969 F.3d

at 30.

            With that overview, we turn to Tinker's first prong and

whether it was reasonable to conclude that Doe's conduct caused a

substantial disruption.

                       i. Substantial Disruption

            Doe   contends   that    the    sanctions   the   Conduct   Panel

imposed violated his First Amendment rights because, pursuant to

the Tinker analysis, it was not reasonable to conclude that his

conduct caused or would cause a substantial disruption. Defendants

reject    Doe's assertion and       argue    that such a conclusion was

reasonable given the impact of Doe's behavior on "multiple female

RAs."13


     13 Doe also maintains that we should not consider defendants'
arguments that his conduct caused a substantial disruption because
the Conduct Panel did not use that language in its decision.
Defendants correctly note, however, that Doe did not make this
argument below, and it therefore "cannot be surfaced for the first
time on appeal."    Zhou v. Desktop Metal, Inc., 120 F.4th 278,
287-88 (1st Cir. 2024) (quoting McCoy v. Mass. Inst. of Tech., 950
F.2d 13, 22 (1st Cir. 1991)).


                                    - 21 -
             Under   Tinker's   substantial-disruption         prong,   student

speech or expressive conduct may be restricted if it "materially

and    substantially     interfer[es]       with    the       requirements   of

appropriate discipline in the operation of the school."                 393 U.S.

at 513 (quoting Burnside v. Byars, 363 F.2d 744, 749 (5th Cir.

1966)).   But a school may not restrict speech based on "a mere

desire to avoid the discomfort and unpleasantness that always

accompany an unpopular viewpoint."          Id. at 509.       Tinker also does

not "permit a 'hurt feelings' exception that any opinion that could

cause 'offense' may trigger."        L.M. v. Town of Middleborough, 103

F.4th 854, 875 (1st Cir. 2024), cert. denied, 145 S. Ct. 1489

(2025) (quoting Zamecnik v. Indian Prairie Sch. Dist. No. 204, 636

F.3d 874, 877 (7th Cir. 2011)).             The standard to satisfy the

substantial-disruption prong is "demanding."           Mahanoy, 594 U.S. at

193.

             The Supreme Court's recent decision in Mahanoy offers

helpful guidance as to the amount of disruption sufficient to

satisfy   the   substantial-disruption       prong.       There,    the   Court

considered    whether   a   high   school   violated      a   student's   First

Amendment rights when it disciplined her for speech communicated

via posts on a social media platform.              See 594 U.S. at 183-84.

The student -- B.L. -- published the posts in anger after failing

to make the varsity cheerleading squad, using "vulgar language and

gestures" to criticize the school and the cheerleading team.                 Id.


                                   - 22 -
at 183-85.      The posts were seen by several members of the cheer

squad, who were "upset" by them, and discussions instigated by the

posts interrupted "5 to 10 minutes" of a math class at B.L.'s

school for "a couple of days."            Id. at 185, 192.

              Having learned of the posts, the school disciplined B.L.

and, in the lawsuit that followed, argued that doing so was

necessary to prevent disruption to the school or a school-sponsored

activity, or substantial interference with "the school's efforts

to maintain team cohesion" and morale.                        Id. at 193.       Despite

evidence     that   the    posts      disrupted     a    math   class     on   multiple

occasions and upset community members, the Supreme Court held that

the school could not carry its burden under Tinker because there

was   "no    evidence     in    the   record   of       the   sort   of   'substantial

disruption' of a school activity . . . that might justify the

school's action." Id. at 192-94 (quoting Tinker, 393 U.S. at 514).

              And in Tinker itself, the Court held that middle- and

high-school students' First Amendment rights were violated where

school officials prohibited them from wearing black armbands to

protest the Vietnam War despite evidence that the speech "wrecked"

at least one math lesson at the high school and "took the students'

minds off their classwork."            393 U.S. at 504; id. at 517-18 (Black,

J., dissenting); see id. at 514 (majority opinion) ("[T]he record

does not demonstrate any facts which might reasonably have led

school      authorities    to    forecast      substantial       disruption      of   or


                                        - 23 -
material interference with school activities, and no disturbances

or disorders on the school premises in fact occurred.").

           Likewise, in this court's recent decision in L.M., we

noted that speech by one student that demeans other students and

risks   causing    a    "decline[]"   in    other   students'   "academic

performance"       or      "increases . . . their       absences     from

school" --     i.e., "symptoms of a sick school" -- could support a

school's forecast of substantial disruption.           103 F.3d at 882

(quoting   Nuxoll ex rel. Nuxoll       v.   Indian Prairie Sch. Dist.

No. 204, 523 F.3d 668, 674 (7th Cir. 2008)); id. at 872–74.

           In our view, these cases simply underscore Tinker's

instruction that the disruption caused by a student's conduct must

truly be substantial to warrant impinging on that student's First

Amendment rights.       Applying that standard here, while the record

contains evidence that Doe's conduct was offensive, unwelcome, and

caused discomfort to his peers, it lacks evidence that Doe's

conduct caused, or would cause, a disruption so significant as to

satisfy Tinker's "demanding standard."        Mahanoy, 594 U.S. at 193.

As such, we cannot conclude that the Conduct Panel's decision to

the contrary was reasonable.

           To begin, there is no evidence to suggest that Doe's

conduct disrupted any class or classwork at the University or any

complainant's academics.      In light of prior precedent's focus on

evidence of disruption to the academic environment, its absence


                                  - 24 -
here is noteworthy.       Recall that in Mahanoy, the speech at issue

"upset" other students and interrupted a math class on "a couple

of days" for up to "5 to 10" minutes per day.              594 U.S. at 192.

And in Tinker, the dissent emphasized that the student conduct

"wrecked"    a    class   and   "took   the   students'    minds    off    their

classwork."      393 U.S. at 517-18 (Black, J., dissenting).              But in

both    cases    the   evidence   was   insufficient      to   demonstrate     a

substantial disruption that could justify the schools' speech

restrictions.       See id. at 514 (majority opinion); Mahanoy, 594

U.S. at 192-94.        Here, there is even less evidence of disruption

to classes or classwork than in Mahanoy or Tinker.                 Rather, the

best evidence of any disruption to academics is C.T.'s statement

that "[i]t's awkward" when asked about any effect on her job or

academics.14      In our view, that does not come close to rising to

the level of disruption necessary to satisfy Tinker's "demanding

standard."      Mahanoy, 594 U.S. at 193.     Indeed, there is no evidence

whatsoever that Doe's behavior degraded any individual's academic

pursuits or the academic environment generally.

            Defendants nonetheless contend that they can satisfy

Tinker because it was reasonable for the Conduct Panel to conclude



        While S.K., J.T., and C.T. reported they did not want to
       14

be alone with Doe, there is no evidence that this desire had any
impact on their academics. Indeed, there is nothing to suggest
that they were enrolled in any of the same classes as Doe, or that
completing classwork would require them to be alone with him.


                                   - 25 -
that   Doe's   conduct    caused    a   substantial       disruption    to    the

university RA system.      We do not agree that the record supports

such a finding.    Certainly the complainant RAs found Doe's several

utterances unpleasant -- enough that they expressed discomfort and

the desire not to be alone with him.                 But the complainants

described Doe's comments and conduct as merely "awkward" and

"uncomfortable,"    and    the     record    does   not    suggest     that   any

complainant understood Doe's conduct as a sexual advance.

           Furthermore, the record is devoid of any evidence as to

any impact on the complainants' jobs beyond their desire to avoid

being on duty with Doe or be alone with him.              There is no evidence

or suggestion, for example, that any complainant was required to

be on duty with Doe against their wishes, left their position

(voluntarily or involuntarily), felt as if their only option was

to leave the position, or missed or changed a shift to avoid Doe.

As we noted above, although the Conduct Panel's decision states

that Doe's conduct "impacted" J.T. and C.T.'s ability to work as

RAs, the only factual support for that statement is J.T.'s comment

that "the discomfort [she] felt" because of Doe's conduct had

"[n]ot too bad of an impact on her job," and C.T.'s statement that

it was "awkward."        Without more, and considering the evidence

objectively as we must, those impacts do not suffice to show a

substantial disruption under Tinker.           See L.M., 103 F.4th at 875.




                                    - 26 -
             The record also cannot support a finding that Doe's

comment to G.D. justified the        sanction imposed.       The record

reflects that during a conversation with G.D. about Jehovah's

Witnesses and the practice of religious proselytism, Doe twice

asked: "what if I stuck my penis in your face."         As G.D. herself

explained, Doe followed up his statements by explaining that his

comment was meant to caricature "what Jehovah's Witness folks

do[,] . . . 'shoving their beliefs in your face.'"           The record

also shows that G.D. "[d]id not think about [the interaction] much"

at the time and that       her momentary reaction -- of "fear and

confusion" about Doe's "intent" -- was the extent of the comment's

impact.    There is no evidence that her reaction was more than

momentary.

             We are similarly unpersuaded by defendants' argument

that it was reasonable to forecast future disruption because Doe's

behavior constituted "a pervasive pattern of unwelcome conduct."

Simply    put,   the   statements,   hugs,   and   single   incident   of

foot-adjusting on which the Conduct Panel relied fall considerably

short of "a pervasive pattern."       Recall that the findings about

Doe's comments to complainants were limited to one comment to G.D.

in 2022, one comment to C.T. in 2023, and one comment to S.K. in

2023.

             In sum, the record lacks evidence sufficient to show

that Doe's conduct caused a disruption as substantial as those at


                                 - 27 -
issue in Tinker or Mahanoy, which themselves were insufficient to

constitute a substantial disruption.        See Tinker, 393 U.S. at 514;

Mahanoy, 594 U.S. 193–94.         Likewise, we do not see how that

evidence could reasonably support finding that Doe's behavior

would cause such a disruption in the future.            Indeed, there is no

evidence that Doe ever made similar statements or physical contact

once he was told that such statements and contact were unwelcome

and offensive.      Finally, this is also not a case where Doe's

comments were repeatedly directed at a single target, such that

the cumulative effect could reasonably be seen as threatening.

Cf. Doe v. Valencia Coll., 903 F.3d 1220, 1224-26, 1230–31 (11th

Cir. 2018) (holding that a school did not violate a student's First

Amendment rights in suspending the student where he persistently

harassed another student).        Rather, Doe's cited verbal conduct

included three separate statements to three different individuals.

           We now turn to Tinker's remaining prong.

                          ii. Rights of Others

           We start with the parties' arguments.          Doe contends that

none of his conduct could reasonably be found to have invaded the

rights of others and that the evidence does not show that his

conduct "impacted any complainant's ability to study or work" at

the   University.    He   also   argues    that   his   conduct   is   easily

distinguished from the behavior at issue in prior cases in which

courts have held that the rights of others have been invaded.


                                  - 28 -
Defendants counter that the evidence of the impact of Doe's conduct

on his colleagues was "more than sufficient to support" finding

that the panel "reasonabl[y] determin[ed]" Doe invaded the rights

of others.    See Valencia Coll., 903 F.3d 1220.          We agree with Doe.

             In Tinker, the Supreme Court held that school officials

may restrict speech that "inva[des] . . . the rights of others."

393 U.S. at 513.     Since then, however, the rights-of-others prong

has been rarely litigated such that its scope remains somewhat

"unclear."    Saxe v. State Coll. Area Sch. Dist., 240 F.3d 200, 217

(3d Cir. 2001); see also Eisner v. Stamford Bd. of Educ., 440 F.2d

803, 808 (2d Cir. 1971) ("The phrase 'invasion of the rights of

others' is not a model of clarity or preciseness.").                 That said,

we endeavor to glean what we can from precedent.

             We are aware of only three prior First Circuit opinions

that have addressed Tinker's rights-of-others prong.                  First, in

Norris, we explained that "bullying is the type of conduct that

implicates the governmental interest in protecting against the

invasion of the rights of others, as described in Tinker."                     969

F.3d at 29.      We also stated that "[i]t is clear . . . that speech

that   is   merely   offensive    to   the   listener   is   not     enough"   to

constitute    bullying    and,    consequently,    does      not    suffice    to

evidence invasion of the rights of others. Id. at 29 n.18. Rather,

we   suggested    that   speech   constituting     bullying        will   involve

conduct that is "more severe or pervasive" than merely offensive


                                   - 29 -
speech.15    Id.     Second, in a similar vein, we held in Doe v.

Hopkinton Public Schools that student speech that "actively and

pervasively encourages bullying" could constitute "invading the

rights of others" under Tinker.       19 F.4th 493, 509 (1st Cir. 2021).

Finally, we confronted the rights-of-others prong in L.M., but

there we noted only that "we ha[d] not addressed the scope of th[e

rights-of-others] limitation," other than to find that bullying

falls within it.       103 F.4th at 868.      These cases offer little

guidance here, as defendants do not allege that Doe's behavior

constituted bullying.

            Likely   due   to   the   lack   of   in-circuit   precedent,

defendants urge us to look to the Eleventh Circuit's decision in

Valencia College for guidance, arguing that it dealt with analogous

conduct.    Indeed, defendants highlight that like the plaintiff in

Valencia College, Doe caused at least one student to be "made

'fearful'" and further contend that Doe's behavior was, in fact,

"more pervasive and more closely tied to campus than the conduct

in Valencia College."       But Valencia College involved prolonged

virtual stalking of a woman by a rejected suitor who persisted

around the clock and in the face of law enforcement involvement.


     15  Moreover, in Mahanoy the Supreme Court applied Tinker to
suggest that public schools may regulate "severe bullying and
harassment targeting particular individuals."    See 594 U.S. at
188.   The Court declined to specify, however, whether bullying
falls under or satisfies the substantial disruption prong, the
rights-of-others prong, or both.


                                  - 30 -
See 903 F.3d at 1225–27.            Doe's "awkward" comments, hugs, and a

single incident of foot-touching simply do not compare to the

extreme course of conduct in Valencia College.

               Finally, defendants appear to suggest that there is some

significance to the argument that "Doe's conduct was likely at

least tortious."        We are aware of only one circuit -- the Eighth

Circuit -- that        has    recognized   any   connection   between     the

rights-of-others prong and tort liability.               See Kuhlmeier v.

Hazelwood Sch. Dist., 795 F.2d 1368, 1375-77 (8th Cir. 1986), rev'd

on other grounds, 484 U.S. 260 (1988).           There, however, the court

held    that     a   school   may   restrict   student   speech   under   the

rights-of-others prong "only when publication of that speech could

result in tort liability for the school."           Id. at 1376 (emphasis

added).     But here no party argues that Doe's conduct created tort

liability for the University.          Thus, insofar as defendants can be

understood to urge us to endorse the Eighth Circuit's decision in

Kuhlmeier, we see no need to do so here.16




       16In L.M., we noted -- in dicta -- that "while the
rights-of-others limitation appears to encompass tortious speech,"
we did not have to address the issue because "there [was] no
developed contention that speech of that sort [was] involved."
103 F.4th at 867. As the issue was not presented in that case, we
did not affirmatively address or make any findings about the scope
of the rights-of-others prong (other than affirming that certain
instances of bullying may satisfy that prong). See id. at 867-68.


                                      - 31 -
             We thus turn to Defendants' remaining argument that the

Individual Defendants are entitled to qualified immunity as to

Doe's claim for money damages.

                           B. Qualified Immunity

             When public officials, like the Individual Defendants,

are sued in their personal capacity for money damages, the doctrine

of   qualified   immunity     shields    them   from    pecuniary    liability

"unless (1) they violated a federal statutory or constitutional

right, and (2) the unlawfulness of their conduct was 'clearly

established at the time.'"          District of Columbia v. Wesby, 583

U.S. 48, 62-63 (2018) (quoting Reichle v. Howards, 566 U.S. 658,

664 (2012)).      "The goal of qualified immunity is to 'give[]

government     officials     breathing   room    to    make   reasonable   but

mistaken judgments about open legal questions.'"               Ciarametaro v.

City of Gloucester, 87 F.4th 83, 87-88 (1st Cir. 2023) (alteration

in original) (quoting Ashcroft v. al-Kidd, 563 U.S. 731, 743

(2011)).     Accordingly, we will not find that a rule was "clearly

established" unless at the time the official acted, "the law was

sufficiently clear [such] that every reasonable official would

understand that what they [were] doing [was] unlawful."                Heredia

v. Roscoe, 125 F.4th 34, 46-47 (1st Cir. 2025) (quoting Segrain v.

Duffy,   118   F.4th   45,   57   (1st   Cir.   2024)).       In   consequence,

qualified immunity protects "all but the plainly incompetent or




                                    - 32 -
those who knowingly violate the law."               Wesby, 583 U.S. at 63

(quoting Malley v. Briggs, 475 U.S. 335, 341 (1986)).

            To be clearly established, there must be "controlling

authority or a robust consensus of cases of persuasive authority,

clearly demonstrating the violative nature of the defendant's

particular conduct."        Ciarametaro, 87 F.4th at 88 (cleaned up)

(quoting Ashcroft, 563 U.S. at 741-42).              Although the authority

need not be "directly on point," it must be "sufficiently analogous

to   'place[]     the   statutory   or    constitutional       question    beyond

debate.'"     Id. (alteration in original) (quoting Ashcroft, 563

U.S. at 741–42).        It is a "heavy burden."      Est. of Rahim by Rahim

v. Doe, 51 F.4th 402, 410 (1st Cir. 2022) (quoting Lachance v.

Town of Charlton, 990 F.3d 14, 20 (1st Cir. 2021)).

            Doe    argues   that    the   Individual     Defendants       are   not

entitled to qualified immunity because the right of university

students to engage in "offensive" expression on a public university

campus has been "well-established in this [c]ircuit for over half

a century."     In response, defendants argue that even if Doe could

show a constitutional violation -- as we conclude he has -- he

cannot carry his burden under the "clearly established" prong

because he did not identify controlling authority or a consensus

of   persuasive     authority   that      would   have   put   the   Individual

Defendants on notice that disciplining Doe for his speech violated

his First Amendment rights.


                                    - 33 -
          We agree with defendants.     Prior to this case, as the

district court accurately noted, there was an "absence of First

Circuit precedent"   addressing the particular    circumstances at

issue here.   Doe, 2024 WL 1521758, at *9.   Nor has Doe identified

sufficiently analogous case law that put it "beyond debate" whether

a university can discipline a student for offensive speech that

did not materially disrupt the educational environment or any

student's academics.17   Ciarametaro, 87 F.4th at 88.   Furthermore,


     17 As the district court explained, the cases Doe relies on
to argue that the Individual Defendants' conduct was clearly
established as illegal are factually distinguishable from the
present case. See Papish v. Bd. of Curators of Univ. of Mo., 410
U.S. 667, 667-70 (1973) (holding that university violated
student's First Amendment rights by expelling student for
distributing newspaper with a political cartoon the university
viewed as explicit and offensive); Gay Students Org. of Univ. of
N.H. v. Bonner, 509 F.2d 652, 654, 662 (1st Cir. 1974) (holding
that First Amendment protected right of student organization to
hold social activities on university's campus); L.M., 103 F.4th at
868 (finding that "demean[ing]" speech by middle school student
that targeted certain classmates' personal characteristics could
be restricted); Doe v. Hopkinton Pub. Schs., 490 F. Supp. 3d 448,
467–68 (D. Mass. 2020) (holding that bullying in the high school
environment was not protected by First Amendment); Flores v.
Bennett, No. 22-16762, 2023 WL 4946605, at *1–2 (9th Cir. Aug. 3,
2023) (finding that high school's "flyer policy" was likely
facially overbroad insofar as it prohibited "inappropriate or
offense [sic] language or themes"); Saxe, 240 F.3d at 212, 215–18
(holding that school district's anti-harassment policy was
unconstitutionally overbroad because, in part, it purported to
prohibit offensive or unwelcome speech); Nuxoll, 523 F.3d at 674
(holding that high-school student was likely to prevail on his
claim that his school would violate his First Amendment rights by
preventing him from wearing a shirt bearing the slogan "Be Happy,
Not Gay"); Thonen v. Jenkins, 491 F.2d 722, 723-24 (4th Cir. 1973)
(holding that    First Amendment prohibited university from
disciplining students for using single expletive in a letter
published in a school newspaper).


                               - 34 -
we are aware of no such cases.             Consequently, we cannot conclude

that every reasonable official would have known disciplining Doe

was illegal.   Indeed, our analysis on the First Amendment question

underscores the lack of on-point precedent, making it evident that

Doe's   rights,     at   the     time     in     question,   were   not   clearly

established.   This is a close case, in which Doe prevails only in

the context of rather constricted arguments by defendants.                      We

therefore   agree    with   the    district        court   that   the   Individual

Defendants are entitled to qualified immunity as to Doe's request

for monetary damages.          In so holding, we note that this does not

bar Doe's claims for prospective injunctive relief against the

Individual Defendants in their official capacities.

                                 V. Conclusion

            For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the district

court is reversed as to the merits of Doe's First Amendment claim

but affirmed as to the Individual Defendants' entitlement to

qualified immunity.




                                        - 35 -