United States Court of Appeals
                      For the First Circuit


No. 24-1419

               JOHN DOE; JANE DOE; and JAMES DOE,

                     Plaintiffs, Appellants,

                               v.

   CITY OF BOSTON; PAUL EVANS, individually; ROBERT DUNFORD,
individually; MELBERT AHEARN, individually; ANNE MARIE DOHERTY,
 individually; LADONNA HATTON, individually; EILEEN VANDERWOOD,
     individually; JOHN MCLEAN, individually; MARIE DONAHUE,
individually; BOSTON POLICE PATROLMAN'S ASSOCIATION; THOMAS NEE,
  individually; PATRICK ROSE, SR., individually; FRANCES ROSE;
  GAIL SULLIVAN, individually; SHERYL HILLIARD, individually;
 RAYMOND SMITH, individually; RUDOLPH ADAMS, individually; and
                    BOSTON POLICE DEPARTMENT,

                     Defendants, Appellees,

MASSACHUSETTS DEPARTMENT OF CHILDREN AND FAMILIES; DCF DEFENDANT
 DOES 1-5, individually; BPD DEFENDANT DOES 1-5, individually;
           and BPPA DEFENDANT DOES 1-5, individually,

                           Defendants.


          APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
               FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

     [Hon. F. Dennis Saylor, IV, Chief U.S. District Judge]


                             Before

                       Barron, Chief Judge,
              Thompson and Rikelman, Circuit Judges.


     Patrick Driscoll, Janine D. Kutylo, and Anthony M. Buonopane,
with whom Boyle Shaughnessy Law was on brief, for appellants.

     Edward F. Whitesell, Jr., Senior Assistant Corporation
Counsel, with whom Adam D. Johnson, Senior Assistant Corporation
Counsel, and City of Boston Law Department were on brief, for
appellees City of Boston, Paul Evans, Robert Dunford, Melbert
Ahearn, Anne Marie Doherty, LaDonna Hatton, Eileen Vanderwood,
John McLean, and Marie Donahue.

     Thomas Donohue, with whom Leonard H. Kesten and Brody,
Hardoon, Perkins & Kesten, LLP were on brief, for appellees Boston
Police Patrolman's Association and Thomas Nee.

     John B. Kulevich, with whom The Law Offices of John B.
Kulevich, LLC was on brief, for appellee Frances Rose.


                          July 25, 2025
          RIKELMAN, Circuit Judge.            From 1990 to 1999, Patrick

Rose, Sr., a police officer with the Boston Police Department

(BPD), sexually abused two children, John and Jane Doe.                         Rose

ultimately pled guilty to 21 counts of child rape and sexual

assault in April 2022.       The Does, now adults, then sued Rose, the

BPD, and a number of other defendants who played a role in the

investigation   and   response      to   their     sexual      abuse   allegations

against Rose in the 1990s.            Their primary claim was that the

defendants had deprived them of their Fourteenth Amendment right

to bodily integrity by affirmatively enhancing the danger to John

and Jane from Rose's abuse.

          The   district     court       dismissed       the   case    before   any

discovery.    It concluded that the defendants could not be held

responsible   under   what    is    known    as    the    state-created     danger

doctrine, because the Does had not sufficiently alleged that the

defendants' actions had enhanced Rose's abuse and caused them harm.

It also dismissed the Does' remaining claims.

          We vacate the district court's decision as to the Does'

Fourteenth Amendment claims only.                 We conclude that the Does

plausibly alleged that at least some of the defendants' actions

enhanced the danger to them, meeting the first requirement of the

state-created danger test.         Thus, we remand for the district court

to evaluate those actions under the test's remaining requirements.




                                     - 3 -
                               I. BACKGROUND

                              A. Relevant Facts

          In    reviewing      the    district    court's   grant    of    the

defendants'    motions   to    dismiss    under   Federal   Rule    of    Civil

Procedure 12(b)(6), we "'draw the facts from the complaint and its

attachments,' taking the well-pleaded facts as true and construing

all reasonable inferences in [the Does'] favor."             Lawrence Gen.

Hosp. v. Cont'l Cas. Co., 90 F.4th 593, 595 (1st Cir. 2024)

(quoting Lanza v. Fin. Indus. Regul. Auth., 953 F.3d 159, 161 (1st

Cir. 2020)).

         1. Initial Allegations and Criminal Investigation

          As we described earlier, this case arises from Rose's

sexual abuse of two young children, John and Jane Doe, while Rose

was employed as a BPD police officer.             Both children lived with

Rose, who was married to their mother, Frances.1             Rose sexually

abused John Doe from approximately 1990 through 1997, when John

was between eight and fourteen years old, and sexually abused Jane

Doe from approximately 1990 through 1999, when Jane was between

five and fourteen years old.         Rose also sexually abused four other

children who were family members from at least 1990 through 2020.

          On November 8, 1995, the Massachusetts Department of

Children and Families (DCF) received a report that Rose sexually


     1 We refer to Frances Rose, Rose's spouse, by her first name
to avoid any confusion.


                                     - 4 -
abused John Doe.       DCF accepted the report for investigation that

same day.

             Later that week, the BPD began its own investigation.

Lieutenant Marie Donahue and Sergeant Detective John McLean of the

BPD's Sexual Assault Unit were assigned to the case.           On November

10, they interviewed John Doe in a police car in front of Rose's

home, while Rose and his wife Frances stood outside the home and

watched.     During the interview, John told the officers that Rose

had sexually abused him.          The BPD officers then arrested Rose for

Indecent Assault and Battery on a Child Under 14 and prepared an

internal BPD incident report regarding the abuse.           That same day,

Rose   was    served   with   a    restraining   order   barring   him   from

contacting John, Jane, another child victim who was a family

member, and a fourth minor, and then placed on administrative duty

by BPD.      On November 11, the BPD confiscated Rose's weapons and

license to carry a firearm.         A few days later, two of John's minor

friends confirmed to Sgt. Det. McLean that Rose had forced John to

touch him inappropriately multiple times.

             After Rose's arrest, from November 13 to November 16,

DCF employees conducted their interviews and investigation of

John's sexual abuse allegations.             Lt. Donahue had previously

instructed DCF not to visit the Rose home, "as the allegation

pertained to a Boston Police officer."            She indicated that she

would visit the home instead to avoid any potential harm to the


                                     - 5 -
family, given that Rose was armed and could react in a hostile

manner.   Contrary to investigative protocols, Lt. Donahue also

instructed DCF not to interview John again.      The DCF employees

followed her directive and interviewed Jane, but not John, in front

of Frances.   On November 16, DCF concluded that evidence supported

the allegation that Rose had sexually abused John.         It then

referred the case to the district attorney.

           Several days later, Sgt. Det. McLean filed a criminal

complaint in state court against Rose for Indecent Assault and

Battery on a Child Under 14.   Rose was arraigned on that charge on

December 1, 1995; he was represented by an attorney working for

the local police union, the Boston Police Patrolman's Association

(BPPA).   At the arraignment, the court sentenced Rose to pre-trial

probation for one year, until December 1, 1996, and ordered him to

attend therapy directed by DCF.

           Rose did not comply with the state court order to attend

therapy or with the restraining order issued against him, but none

of the defendants took any action in response.        Instead, DCF

consented to the withdrawal of the restraining order against Rose

in January 1996, just two months after it was entered.   Similarly,

in February 1996, Anne Marie Doherty, the Superintendent-in-Chief

of the BPD Office of Internal Investigations, and LaDonna Hatton,

the BPD Legal Advisor, approved vacating the restraining order.




                               - 6 -
            On   May   7,   1996,   the   Commonwealth   of   Massachusetts

dismissed the indecent assault and battery criminal complaint

against Rose seven months before his pre-trial probation period

was scheduled to end.       The Commonwealth alleged that Rose had met

the requirements of his pre-trial probation and that the victims

were no longer willing to cooperate with the prosecution.

            2. BPD Internal Investigation and Reinstatement

            Meanwhile, in December 1995, Sergeant Detective Eileen

Vanderwood of the BPD Internal Affairs Division (IAD) prepared an

internal complaint against Rose based on the criminal charge

against him for Indecent Assault and Battery on a Child Under 14.

Five months later, in April 1996, the IAD ordered Rose to report

for an interview.      Sgt. Det. Vanderwood interviewed Rose in early

June 1996, but Rose asserted his Fifth Amendment privilege and

refused to provide information about the allegations.

            The IAD sustained the complaint against Rose shortly

after his interview, finding that he violated an internal BPD rule

barring employees from "commit[ting] any criminal act."                 Under

that BPD rule, violators "shall be subject to disciplinary action

up to and including discharge from the Department."            Yet none of

the   BPD   officers    investigated      the   allegations   against   Rose

further, ordered or recommended disciplinary measures, or made a

final disposition on the sustained complaint.




                                    - 7 -
             In May 1997, after Rose had been on administrative duty

at the BPD for over a year, his BPPA attorney requested that he be

reinstated to full duty and submitted affidavits from John and

Frances recanting John's allegations of sexual abuse against Rose.

In October 1997, Rose's attorney also filed a grievance with the

Office of Labor Relations (OLR) for the City of Boston ("the

City"), claiming that the BPD had no just cause for placing Rose

on administrative duty.       The OLR denied the grievance.

             Even though the IAD sustained the sexual abuse complaint

against Rose and the OLR found that the BPD appropriately placed

Rose   on    administrative    duty,   BPD   Commissioner   Paul   Evans

reinstated Rose to full duty in May 1998, without imposing any

sanctions.     Rose served as a police officer for the next twenty

years, until his retirement in 2018.         Rose also was elected and

served as the president of the BPPA from 2014 to 2018.

             After John's 1995 complaint, Rose continued to sexually

abuse John, Jane, and the four other child victims.

             3. Renewed Criminal Complaint and Prosecution

             In 2020, when John was in his late 30s, he again reported

to the BPD that Rose had sexually abused him and four other victims

when they were children.       A Massachusetts grand jury returned an

indictment with 33 counts of sexual abuse charges against Rose.

And, in April 2022, Rose pled guilty to 21 counts of child rape

and sexual assault and was sentenced to prison.         John testified


                                  - 8 -
during Rose's 2022 sentencing hearing that Rose's sexual abuse

escalated after November 1995 because the City did nothing in

response to John's report.

                      B. Procedural History

          In March 2024, John Doe, Jane Doe, and James Doe (Jane

Doe's husband) filed an amended complaint against Rose, Frances,

the City of Boston, individual BPD officers ("the BPD defendants"),

the BPPA, individual BPPA employees, and individual DCF employees

("the DCF defendants").2   Counts 1-10 allege claims under 42 U.S.C.

§ 1983 against Rose, Frances, the BPD and DCF defendants, and the

City for violations of the Does' substantive due process rights to

bodily integrity.   Counts 11-15 allege claims under 42 U.S.C.

§ 1985 against the same defendants, as well as the BPPA and the

individual BPPA defendants, on the ground that the defendants

conspired to deprive the Does of their civil rights. The remaining

28 counts allege state-law statutory claims and common-law claims.

Most of the defendants moved to dismiss the amended complaint under

Rule 12(b)(6).3


     2 The Does' initial complaint also included claims against
DCF, but the Does voluntarily dismissed their claims against the
agency in August 2023. See Doe v. City of Bos., No. CV 23-11294,
2024 WL 1346018, at *6 (D. Mass. Mar. 29, 2024).

     3 Rose did not file a motion to dismiss before the district
court. Nor did the DCF defendants, who were only named in the
amended complaint ten days before the district court dismissed
that complaint in full. As we discuss below, we agree with the



                                - 9 -
             The district court dismissed the amended complaint in

full.     See Doe v. City of Bos., No. CV 23-11294, 2024 WL 1346018,

at *2 (D. Mass. Mar. 29, 2024).             As relevant to this appeal, it

dismissed the § 1983 claims against the BPD and DCF defendants

after rejecting the argument that these defendants violated the

Does' substantive due process rights by affirmatively enhancing

the danger they faced from Rose.            See id. at *12-16.       The court

then dismissed the § 1983 claims against the City based on its

conclusion      that   the     Does   had   not    alleged    any    underlying

constitutional violation by any city employee, and thus they could

not   meet    the   test     for   municipal    liability    under   Monell   v.

Department of Social Services of the City of New York, 436 U.S.

658, 694 (1978).       See Doe, 2024 WL 1346018, at *16.

             As for the § 1985 claims, the district court concluded

that the Does did not sufficiently plead that the defendants were

motivated by class-based animus to conspire and deprive John and

Jane Doe of their civil rights.                See id. at *16-17.       Lastly,

because the court dismissed all the federal claims, it declined to

exercise supplemental jurisdiction over the remaining state-law

claims.      See id. at *17.

             The Does timely appealed.



Does that the court should not have dismissed some of the claims
against the DCF defendants without giving the Does an opportunity
to be heard on those particular allegations. See infra Section
III.A.1.


                                      - 10 -
                      II. STANDARD OF REVIEW

          "We review de novo a district court's decision to grant

a motion to dismiss under Rule 12(b)(6), reversing the dismissal

only if 'the combined allegations, taken as true . . . state a

plausible, not a merely conceivable, case for relief.'"            Lawrence

Gen. Hosp., 90 F.4th at 598 (quoting Lee v. Conagra Brands, Inc.,

958 F.3d 70, 74 (1st Cir. 2020)).             To determine whether the

plaintiff's   allegations   are    plausible,     we   "separate   factual

allegations from conclusory ones."          Id. (quoting Conformis, Inc.

v. Aetna, Inc., 58 F.4th 517, 528 (1st Cir. 2023)).                We then

"accept as true all well-pleaded facts alleged in [the Does']

complaint and draw all reasonable inferences therefrom in [their]

favor."   Id. (quoting Lanza, 953 F.3d at 162).

                            III. DISCUSSION

          The Does raise three arguments on appeal.          First, they

contend that the district court should not have dismissed their

Fourteenth Amendment claims against the BPD and DCF defendants

because they plausibly alleged that these defendants are liable

under the state-created danger doctrine.          Relatedly, they point

out that the district court should not have dismissed all of their

claims against the DCF defendants sua sponte, without giving the

Does an opportunity to be heard.4          Second, they argue that their


     4 The Does do not challenge the dismissal of the Fourteenth
Amendment claims against Rose and Frances.


                                  - 11 -
Fourteenth Amendment claims against the City should have survived

because they were injured by the City's custom of mishandling

citizen complaints against police officers.           Third, they claim

that the district court erred in dismissing their § 1985 claims on

the basis that they are not members of a protected class.               We

address each argument in turn.

                         A. Section 1983 Claims

          The    Does   allege   that   the   defendants   violated   their

Fourteenth Amendment substantive due process rights to "bodily

integrity."     The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment

provides that "[n]o State shall . . . deprive any person of life,

liberty, or property, without due process of law."            U.S. Const.

amend. XIV.     To establish a substantive due process claim, the

Does must show "a deprivation of a protected interest in life,

liberty, or property" and "that the deprivation of this protected

right was caused by governmental conduct." Rivera v. Rhode Island,

402 F.3d 27, 33-34 (1st Cir. 2005).            Here, the parties do not

dispute that Rose deprived the Does of their liberty interest in

bodily autonomy when he sexually abused them.          But they disagree

on whether governmental conduct caused this harm and, thus, whether

the defendants may be held liable for Rose's sexual abuse.5


     5 The Does brought their Fourteenth Amendment claims under 42
U.S.C. § 1983. "[T]o state a claim under § 1983, a plaintiff must
allege (1) the violation of a right protected by the Constitution



                                  - 12 -
             In   particular,    the     parties   dispute     whether    the

defendants can be held liable for Rose's sexual abuse under the

state-created danger doctrine.6        The district court concluded that

none of the Does' allegations were sufficient to state a valid

claim under this doctrine against any defendant.             But, on appeal,

the   Does    contend   that    "[t]he    [c]omplaint   is    replete    with

allegations of affirmative acts by the individual [defendants]"

that could form the basis of a successful state-created danger

claim.

             We focus our analysis on four of the acts alleged by the

Does against the BPD defendants because, as we explain below, we

agree that those acts are affirmative and thus could potentially

provide the basis for a state-created danger claim.              Those acts

are: (1) Sgt. Det. McLean and Lt. Donahue's decision to interview



or laws of the United States and (2) that the perpetrator of the
violation was acting under color of law."           Cruz-Erazo v.
Rivera-Montañez, 212 F.3d 617, 621 (1st Cir. 2000). The parties
disagree only about whether the Does have alleged a constitutional
violation; none of the defendants, other than Frances, dispute
that they acted under color of law. And, as we noted earlier, the
Does do not challenge the district court's dismissal of their
Fourteenth Amendment claims against either Frances or Rose.

      6The Does also argue that the district court erred by failing
to consider their due process claims for the deprivation of their
"right to court access," which are "[s]eparate and [d]istinct from
[their] [b]odily [i]ntegrity [due process] claim[s]." But we see
no such claims in their amended complaint.         The ten counts
alleging violations under § 1983 discuss only the Does' rights "to
bodily integrity and to be free from deprivation of liberty without
due process of law."    Nor did the Does raise this court access
theory to the district court in their motion to dismiss briefing.


                                   - 13 -
John in front of Rose, his abuser; (2) Lt. Donahue's instruction

to    DCF   not   to    visit    Rose's         home   or    reinterview    John;

(3) Superintendent-in-Chief Doherty and Legal Advisor Hatton's

approval of vacating the restraining order against Rose; and

(4) Commissioner Evans's decision to reinstate Rose to full duty.

             We disagree with the district court that the Does'

Fourteenth Amendment claims against the BPD defendants fail at the

initial prongs of the state-created danger test.               We also conclude

that the court should not have dismissed the § 1983 claims against

the DCF defendants without permitting the Does to address those

claims in particular.      Thus, we remand for the district court to

re-evaluate the Fourteenth Amendment claims against the BPD and

DCF    defendants.      And because the court dismissed the claims

against the City on the ground that the Does did not allege a

plausible state-created danger claim (or any other constitutional

violation)    against   any     city    employee,      we   remand   for   further

proceedings as to the Does' claims against the City as well.

                         1. State-Created Danger

             As a general matter, "a State's failure to protect an

individual against private violence simply does not constitute a

violation of the Due Process Clause."             DeShaney v. Winnebago Cnty.

Dep't of Soc. Servs., 489 U.S. 189, 197 (1989).              But when the state

creates or enhances the danger to an individual from that private

violence, then a due process claim may be available.                 See Irish v.


                                       - 14 -
Fowler, 979 F.3d 65, 73-75 (1st Cir. 2020) (citing DeShaney, 489

U.S. at 201).

           Before us, the Does do not challenge the district court's

conclusion that Rose's sexual abuse constituted private violence

falling under the DeShaney rule.            They contend only that the

district   court   should    not    have    dismissed   their      Fourteenth

Amendment claims because they plausibly alleged that the BPD

defendants are liable under the state-created danger doctrine.

           Our court first recognized a viable state-created danger

claim in 2020 in Irish v. Fowler, joining nine other federal

circuits at the time.       See id. at 73-76.      Under Irish, to state

such a claim, a plaintiff must show:

           (1) that a state actor or state actors
           affirmatively acted to create or enhance a
           danger to the plaintiff;

           (2) that the act or acts created or enhanced
           a danger specific to the plaintiff and
           distinct from the danger to the general
           public;

           (3) that the act           or    acts   caused   the
           plaintiff's harm; and

           (4) that the state actor's conduct,              when
           viewed in total, shocks the conscience.

                (i) Where officials have the opportunity
                to make unhurried judgments, deliberate
                indifference may shock the conscience,
                particularly where the state official
                performs multiple acts of indifference to
                a rising risk of acute and severe danger.
                To show deliberate indifference, the
                plaintiff must, at a bare minimum,


                                   - 15 -
                    demonstrate that the defendant actually
                    knew of a substantial risk of serious
                    harm and disregarded that risk.

                    (ii) Where state actors must act in a
                    matter of seconds or minutes, a higher
                    level of culpability is required.

Id. at 75.

             Only the first and third prongs of the state-created

danger test are at issue in this appeal.           Under the first prong,

a plaintiff must allege an affirmative act rather than a failure

to act.     For example, a government official who fails to conduct

an   adequate   investigation     or     to   intervene    "when   suspicious

circumstances dictated a more active role for [the state]" does

not engage in any affirmative acts.            DeShaney, 489 U.S. at 197,

201, 203; see also, e.g., Johnson v. City of Biddeford, 92 F.4th

367, 378 (1st Cir. 2024) (concluding that an officer's "fail[ures]

to inquire whether [a suspect] had access to a firearm, initiate

a mental health intervention, or arrest or summons [him] for a

criminal violation" were not affirmative acts).             But actions such

as contacting a suspect or promising to protect a victim from harm

could     qualify    as   affirmative,    depending   on    the    particular

circumstances, and thus give rise to a state-created danger claim

if they also enhance the danger the plaintiff faces.               See Irish,

979 F.3d at 75, 78-79.

             To determine whether an affirmative act enhanced the

danger to the plaintiff under the first prong of the test, we


                                   - 16 -
evaluate whether the act "render[ed] [the plaintiff] any more

vulnerable to [harm]."           DeShaney, 489 U.S. at 201.                 Critically,

there is no need for the affirmative act to "greatly" enhance the

danger.     Welch v. City of Biddeford Police Dep't, 12 F.4th 70, 76

(1st Cir. 2021) (citing Irish, 979 F.3d at 75).                      For example, we

have   held    that    tipping   off    the     suspect    in    a   sexual     assault

investigation that the victim had filed a police report against

him was sufficient to enhance the danger to the victim based on

the circumstances of that case.            See, e.g., Irish, 979 F.3d at 75

(adopting      district      court's      reasoning        for   denying       summary

judgment), aff'g in part, 436 F. Supp. 3d 362, 415 (D. Me. 2020)

(explaining that jury could find that officer's act of leaving

voicemail for suspect enhanced danger to plaintiffs by causing

suspect to "fl[y] into a rage" and "inflict[] significant harm on

the    [p]laintiffs");       Rivera,   402    F.3d    at    37   (concluding         that

officers' unfulfilled promises of protection could enhance risk to

victim if they "induced [her] into a false sense of security, into

thinking she had some degree of protection from the risk, when she

had none from the state").

              The third prong of the state-created danger test then

requires      that    the   government's      affirmative        acts       caused    the

plaintiff's harm.           In Rivera, after concluding that the police

officers'     unfulfilled      promises    of    protection      to     a    testifying

witness in a federal prosecution may have left her "more vulnerable


                                       - 17 -
to . . . danger," we concluded that the plaintiff nevertheless

could not satisfy the causation requirement.       402 F.3d at 37-38.

As we reasoned, the promises in Rivera "did not deprive [the

victim] of the liberty to act on her own behalf" nor "take away

[her] power to decide whether or not to continue to agree to

testify."    Id. at 38.

            In dismissing the Does' bodily integrity claims, the

district court decided that their claims failed at either the first

or third prong of the state-created danger test.          Specifically,

under the first prong, the court determined that "many" of the

affirmative acts alleged were "not wrongful in any meaningful

sense" and none "created or enhanced the danger to John and Jane"

by "materially chang[ing] Rose's behavior or any of the conditions

of the sexual abuse."     Doe, 2024 WL 1346018, at *15.    It then held

that even if the last of the alleged acts, BPD Commissioner Evans's

decision to reinstate Rose to full duty, did satisfy the first

prong of the test, the Does' claims still would fail at the third

prong -- the causation requirement.      Id. at *15 & n.10.   The court

concluded that "there are no specific factual allegation[s] to

infer that [this act] caused any of the alleged abuse."       Id.

            We disagree with the district court's analysis under the

first prong of the state-created danger test and conclude that the

Does plausibly alleged four affirmative acts that could have

enhanced the danger they faced from Rose, which we previewed


                                - 18 -
above.7       However, we agree with the court's causation analysis as

it relates to the final affirmative act, Rose's reinstatement at

BPD.

               We begin with the first affirmative act -- the BPD

officers' decision to interview John in front of his abuser.             The

defendants do not contest that this was an affirmative act and

argue only that the Does did not plausibly allege that this act

enhanced the danger John and Jane faced.            But we have held that

even "the use of law enforcement tools," such as interviewing and

subpoenaing witnesses, can give rise to a state-created danger

claim       when   they   are   not   "performed   appropriately"   or   are

"wrongful."        Irish, 979 F.3d at 75 (citing Rivera, 402 F.3d at

37).        In Irish, we concluded that a reasonable jury could find

that a police officer enhanced the danger to the plaintiff when he

left her abuser a voicemail requesting an interview because the

voicemail tipped the abuser off to the plaintiff's police report.

See id. (adopting district court's reasoning); Irish, 436 F. Supp.


       The Does also contend that the St. Clair Report "establishes
        7

the requisite affirmative conduct by the BPD," so the district
court erred by failing to consider its contents as providing
additional facts supporting their state-created danger claims.
But even assuming that the report was incorporated into the Does'
amended complaint, we conclude that this argument is waived for
lack of development because the Does do not explain how the
policies and procedures outlined in the St. Clair Report amount to
affirmative acts by the BPD. See United States v. Zannino, 895
F.2d 1, 17 (1st Cir. 1990) ("[I]ssues adverted to in a perfunctory
manner, unaccompanied by some effort at developed argumentation,
are deemed waived.").


                                      - 19 -
3d at 416.    In so ruling, we distinguished the claims in that case

from the ones we rejected in Rivera, because, in Rivera, the

challenged law enforcement acts were "necessary steps of the

investigation      that     could    not    reasonably   be    avoided     and   were

performed appropriately."            Irish, 979 F.3d at 75 (emphasis added)

(citing Rivera, 402 F.3d at 37).                 In Irish, by contrast, the

challenged     act,     although      investigative      in    nature,     was   not

"performed appropriately" because, in "context," "the manner in

which" the police contacted the abuser to interview him "was

wrongful."    Id.; see also Irish, 436 F. Supp 3d at 416 (concluding

that "the mere fact that the [officers] wanted to interview [the

abuser] cannot be the basis for liability," but one officer's

choice to contact the suspect "in a particular time, manner, and

context" that enhanced the danger to the victim could constitute

a   substantive       due   process        violation).        In   particular,    we

highlighted that the officer left the voicemail despite "having

been warned about [the abuser's] threats of violence and [despite

the officers'] own acknowledgement that contacting [the abuser]

would increase the risks to [the plaintiff] and her family."

Irish, 979 F.3d at 75.

             Here, the "time, manner, and context" in which the BPD

officers chose to interview John -- in front of Rose, who was

arrested     and      served        with    a   restraining        order    shortly

afterwards -- plausibly increased the risk of harm to the Does and


                                       - 20 -
could be wrongful.   Irish, 436 F. Supp. 3d at 416.   Just like we

held in Irish that an officer could have enhanced the danger to

the plaintiff by leaving a voicemail for her abuser, tipping him

off to her police report, we hold that the Does plausibly alleged

that the officers enhanced the danger to John by interviewing him

in "a police car in front of Rose's house" while Rose was "standing

outside" watching, thus tipping off Rose to John's report.    After

all, it was during this interview that John told the officers that

Rose sexually abused him.    And Rose was arrested by those same

officers and served with a restraining order later that day.

Further, although interviewing witnesses like John is a "necessary

step[] of the investigation that could not reasonably be avoided,"

the Does plausibly alleged that doing so in this "manner" and

"context" was "wrongful."     Irish, 979 F.3d at 75.      Like the

officers in Irish, the BPD officers here harbored concerns that

Rose could react violently -- but nevertheless decided to interview

John in front of him.   See id.   A jury could find that conducting

the interview in this way, despite other potential options, was

wrongful precisely because doing so would foreseeably "increase[]

[the child's] risk of further abuse."    Lipman v. Budish, 974 F.3d

726, 746 (6th Cir. 2020) (holding that it was reasonable to infer

that "interviewing [a child victim] in front of her alleged abusers




                              - 21 -
and asking about the source of her injuries increased her risk of

further abuse").8

                Moving on to the second affirmative act, we conclude

that the Does plausibly alleged that Lt. Donahue enhanced the

threat of harm to John and Jane by instructing the DCF defendants

not to interview John and "not to go to the Rose home, as the

allegation pertained to a Boston Police officer."                To begin,

according to the amended complaint, the directive not to interview

John violated BPD investigative protocols. We have explained that,

if   a       police   officer's   actions   constituted   "violation[s]   of

protocol and training," plaintiffs have a stronger argument that

those acts "exacerbated the danger" they faced.            Irish v. Maine,

849 F.3d 521, 528 (1st Cir. 2017); cf. Marrero-Rodríguez v. Mun.

of San Juan, 677 F.3d 497, 502 (1st Cir. 2012) (citing the

defendant's "violation of several training protocols" as a factor

"in favor of plaintiffs' Fourteenth Amendment claim").             Further,

it is plausible that the DCF defendants may not have consented to

lifting the restraining order against Rose just two months later




       In their reply brief, the Does cite Lipman v. Budish to
         8

contend that "[t]he allegation of John Doe being interviewed in
the presence of his abuser, by itself, is sufficient to state a
State Created Danger theory" and urge us to "follow the Lipman
analysis and conclude that . . . Appellants have sufficiently pled
State Created Danger against multiple BPD and DCF Appellees." But
Lipman's broader holding is not dispositive here because the Sixth
Circuit's requirements for a state-created danger claim differ
from our own. See 974 F.3d at 744.


                                     - 22 -
if they had interviewed John and heard directly from him about the

abuse or followed up on leads that he could have provided.                And,

as we discuss below, lifting the restraining order plausibly

exposed the children to more harm by emboldening Rose to escalate

the abuse.     Thus, the Does plausibly alleged that Lt. Donahue's

directive to DCF left them "more vulnerable" to the danger they

faced from Rose.     DeShaney, 489 U.S. at 201.9

             We also conclude as to the third act that the Does

plausibly alleged that the BPD officers enhanced the danger John

and   Jane   faced   from   Rose    by   approving   the   vacatur   of   the

restraining order against him.           Taking the allegations in the

amended complaint as true and drawing all reasonable inferences in

the Does' favor, as we must, it is plausible that doing so enhanced

the danger to John and Jane by "embolden[ing] [Rose] to continue

his abuse with impunity."          Martinez v. City of Clovis, 943 F.3d

1260, 1273 (9th Cir. 2019) (holding that officer's praise of abuser


      9The BPD defendants do not contend that the district court
dismissed the state-created danger claims against them on the
independent ground that their directive to DCF was "not wrongful."
Nor did the district court specify which of the affirmative acts
it viewed as "not wrongful in any meaningful sense." Doe, 2024 WL
1346018, at *15.     But to the extent that the district court
concluded that the Does failed to state a claim because it was not
"wrongful" for Lt. Donahue to direct DCF not to reinterview John
or go to the Rose home, we disagree. We find that it is reasonable
to infer from the Does' allegations that the BPD instruction was
wrongful given that it focused on Rose's status as a police
officer: Lt. Donahue instructed DCF not to undertake these steps
because "the [sexual abuse] allegation pertained to a Boston Police
officer."


                                    - 23 -
as "good people" and order not to arrest him after plaintiff's

domestic violence complaint could have enhanced the danger to

plaintiff).    According to the amended complaint, because the BPD

defendants allowed Rose to "avoid[] . . . restraining orders,"

"Rose was emboldened and escalated his abuse against John Doe and

Jane Doe . . . ."10    To be sure, the complaint lacks some key

details about the restraining order, including who filed it, its

duration, and the BPD's role in vacating it.    But, nevertheless,

the Does have alleged that the BPD officers took affirmative steps

to lift the restraining order and that their actions "emboldened"

Rose to "escalate[]" the sexual abuse.   The defendants provide no

reason why those allegations are not plausible; whether the Does'

allegations will stand up in the long run is a question for

discovery.11


     10Although DeShaney arguably involved similar facts to this
case because the victim there also was a child returned to the
custody of his abuser, here, a different outcome is warranted
because we have concluded that the Does plausibly alleged that the
BPD defendants' approval of vacating the restraining order was an
affirmative act that enhanced the danger to John and Jane by
emboldening Rose to escalate his abuse. Cf. DeShaney, 489 U.S. at
201 ("[W]hen [the State] returned [the child] to his father's
custody, it placed him in no worse position than that in which he
would have been had it not acted at all."); see supra Section
III.A.1.

     11 We also conclude that, to the extent the district court
counted this affirmative act as one of "many" that was not
wrongful, we disagree with that assessment at the motion to dismiss
stage. Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to the Does,
they plausibly alleged that the BPD defendants' decision to approve



                               - 24 -
                The district court did not reach the remaining prongs of

the state-created danger test as applied to these three acts, nor

did the parties address the remaining parts of the test in their

briefs     to us, so         we will not         analyze      them on appeal.          See

García-Rubiera v. Calderón, 570 F.3d 443, 458 (1st Cir. 2009)

("Given the lack of briefing and the district court's silence on

this issue, we conclude that the more prudent course is to remand

to   the   district        court   for    further       proceedings . . . .");         cf.

Welch, 12 F.4th at 77 (remanding for consideration of later prongs

of the state-created danger test, "as we here address only the

district court's error in evaluating the danger-enhancing prong").

Instead, we remand to the district court to perform that analysis.

                We   now   turn    to    the    final   act    at   issue    on    appeal:

Commissioner Evans's decision to reinstate Rose to full duty.                          The

district court expressly characterized the reinstatement as an

"act[]     of    affirmative       conduct,"       consistent       with    the    amended

complaint, even though it ultimately concluded that the act did

not "enhance[] the danger to [the Does]."                      Doe, 2024 WL 1346018,

at *15 (concluding that "[i]t is true that the complaint does

assert      some           acts     of         affirmative      conduct           by   the


the vacatur of the restraining order against Rose just three months
after it was entered was wrongful, particularly given Rose's
intervening arraignment for child sexual assault, the IAD's active
investigation of those sexual assault allegations at that time,
and the fact that the BPD defendants knew or reasonably should
have known of Rose's failure to comply with the restraining order.


                                          - 25 -
BPD . . . defendants,"        including   "Commissioner    Evans['s]

reinstate[ment of] Rose to full duty in 1998.").12 It then rejected

the Does' claims as to the reinstatement under the causation prong.

Id. at *15 n.10.

              We agree with the district court that the Does did not

plausibly allege that Commissioner Evans's decision to reinstate

Rose to full duty in May 1998 caused any additional or worse abuse,

thus failing to satisfy the third prong of the state-created danger

test.        According to the Does' amended complaint, Rose stopped

abusing John after 1997, so Rose's 1998 reinstatement could not

have caused additional injury to John.    And the Does do not allege

that Rose's reinstatement caused any additional harm to Jane in

late 1998 or 1999, the final year he abused her, above and beyond

the harm caused by lifting the restraining order.    Thus, we affirm

the district court's dismissal of the Fourteenth Amendment claims




        The BPD defendants dispute whether Commissioner Evans's
        12

reinstatement of Rose was affirmative, claiming that the district
court "correctly found that [it], in context, [was] effectively
[a] form[] of inaction." To be sure, the district court at one
point stated that the reinstatement was "effectively [a] form[] of
inaction" because it amounted to a failure "to take further steps
to investigate or prevent Rose's return to the force." Doe, 2024
WL 1346018, at *15. But, ultimately, we understand the district
court to have concluded that this act was affirmative, given its
repeated characterizations of the reinstatement as an "act[] of
affirmative conduct" and an "affirmative act[]."     Id. at *15 &
n.10.



                                 - 26 -
against    the    BPD     defendants     based    on   Commissioner     Evans's

reinstatement of Rose to full duty.

                                       * * *

            To summarize our analysis of the Does' bodily integrity

claims under the Fourteenth Amendment, we conclude that the Does

plausibly alleged that three acts -- the decision by Lt. Donahue

and Sgt. Det. McLean to interview John in front of Rose, Lt.

Donahue's instruction to DCF not to interview John or go to the

Rose   home,     and    the   BPD   officers'    approval   of   vacating   the

restraining order -- satisfy the first prong of the state-created

danger test.       We remand for the district court to apply the

remaining parts of the test to these alleged acts under the Rule

12(b)(6) standard.        Next, we hold that the Does did not plausibly

allege that Commissioner Evans's decision to reinstate Rose to

full duty caused them any additional harm, so we affirm the

district court's dismissal as to that act.

            Lastly, we agree with the Does that the district court

should    not    have   dismissed    their     Fourteenth   Amendment    claims

against the DCF defendants sua sponte.            See Doe, 2024 WL 1346018,

at *2.    "The general rule is that . . . '[sua sponte] dismissals

[under Rule 12(b)(6)] are erroneous unless the parties have been

afforded notice and an opportunity to amend the complaint or

otherwise respond.'"          Chute v. Walker, 281 F.3d 314, 319 (1st Cir.

2002) (quoting Futura Dev. of P.R. Inc. v. Estado Libre Asociado


                                      - 27 -
de P.R., 144 F.3d 7, 13-14 (1st Cir. 1998)).               As a result, we

vacate the dismissal of the Fourteenth Amendment claims against

the DCF defendants.13

                             2. Monell Liability

            Under Monell v. Department of Social Services of the

City of New York, a municipality may be held liable for an

employee's constitutional violation when that violation was caused

by the employee's "execution of [the municipality's] policy or

custom."    436 U.S. at 694.        Thus, to find that a city is subject

to Monell liability, a court must first find that a city employee

committed an underlying constitutional violation.

            The district court never addressed whether the execution

of a City policy or custom caused the Does' abuse because it

concluded     that     the   Does     had   not   sufficiently      alleged   a

constitutional       violation   by   the   BPD   defendants   or   any   other

municipal employee (under the state-created danger doctrine or

otherwise).    We therefore also vacate the dismissal of the § 1983

claims against the City and remand for the district court to




     13Although the district court also dismissed the Does' § 1985
claims against the DCF defendants, that "sua sponte dismissal may
stand" because "it is crystal clear that [the Does] cannot prevail
[on those claims] and that amending the complaint would be futile."
Chute, 281 F.3d at 319. As we explain below, we agree with the
district court that the Does failed to allege membership in a class
protected under § 1985. See infra Section III.B.


                                      - 28 -
revisit        the   Does'   Monell   claims   after   re-evaluating     their

state-created danger claims.

                             B. Section 1985 Claims

               The Does alleged that the defendants violated 42 U.S.C.

§ 1985 by conspiring to intimidate John and Jane Doe and prevent

them from testifying freely about Rose's sexual abuse and by

conspiring to deprive them of their right to bodily integrity.

Section 1985 prohibits conspiracies to interfere with civil rights

by "(1) preventing officer[s] from performing [their] duties,"

"(2) obstructing justice [by] intimidating [a] party, witness, or

juror," and (3) "[d]epriving persons of [their] rights" to "equal

protection."         42 U.S.C. § 1985.     The district court assumed that

the Does brought their claims under subsections (2) and (3) based

on the allegations made in their amended complaint, and so do we.

It then dismissed the § 1985 claims on three independent grounds,

finding that the Does did not plausibly allege a constitutional

violation, or that John and Jane Doe are members of a protected

class     or     suffered    class-based   discrimination,   or   that     the

defendants acted in a conspiracy. Doe, 2024 WL 1346018, at *16-17,

*17 n.12.

               On appeal, the Does challenge only the district court's

ruling that they failed to state a class-based discrimination claim

under § 1985(3).        We agree with the district court, however, that

the Does did not plausibly allege such a claim because they failed


                                      - 29 -
to identify a cognizable class or any class-based animus.       We do

not consider the other grounds for the district court's decision

to dismiss the § 1985 claims.

           The Does concede that, to state a claim under § 1985(3),

they must plead that the defendants acted based on "some racial,

or   perhaps   otherwise   class-based,   invidiously   discriminatory

animus."   Pérez-Sánchez v. Pub. Bldg. Auth., 531 F.3d 104, 107

(1st Cir. 2008) (quoting Griffin v. Breckenridge, 403 U.S. 88, 102

(1971)).   The Does do not claim to belong to a protected class

based on their race.       Instead, they ask us to recognize a new

protected class under § 1985 of "victims of BPD's internal cover-up

of BPD misconduct in the 1990[s]."

           But the Does merely allege a narrow class of persons

"similarly situated" to themselves, which is insufficient under

binding precedent.   See Harrison v. Brooks, 519 F.2d 1358, 1359-60

(1st Cir. 1975) ("The requirement that the discrimination be

'class-based' is not satisfied by an allegation that there was a

conspiracy which affected the interests of a class of persons

similarly situated with the plaintiffs."); see also Pérez-Sánchez,

531 F.3d at 108 (explaining that § 1985 was "intended to address

racial animus first and foremost," so "not all clearly defined

classes [are] covered by the statute").       The Does simply do not

satisfy the statute's requirements of alleging specific facts to

show that "the defendants conspired against the plaintiffs because


                                - 30 -
of their membership in [such] a class and that the criteria

defining the class were invidious."           Harrison, 519 F.2d at 1360

(emphasis added).

            The Does nevertheless claim they can still prevail under

§ 1985 because recognition of their proposed class would not "open

the   federal    courts   to   a   wide     variety   of   claims,"    citing

Pérez-Sánchez.    531 F.3d at 109.        But we did not recognize a new

protected class in Pérez-Sánchez, let alone establish a rule that

any class that does not "open the federal courts to a wide variety

of claims" is covered by § 1985.              Id.     Doing so would risk

transforming § 1985 into "a general federal tort law."                  United

Bhd. of Carpenters v. Scott, 463 U.S. 825, 834 (1983).                Instead,

in Pérez-Sánchez, we noted that this floodgates concern was one

reason why we declined to recognize the proposed class.               See 531

F.3d at 107-09.    And we reiterated that the U.S. Supreme Court has

held that "not all clearly defined classes [are] covered by the

statute."   Id. at 108 (citing United Bhd., 463 U.S. at 835). Thus,

we affirm the district court's dismissal of the Does' § 1985

claims.14


      14The Does also argued that the district court erred in
dismissing the §§ 1983 and 1985 claims against the BPPA "without
proffering any reason for the dismissal."       But the amended
complaint did not include § 1983 claims against the BPPA; it only
included § 1985 claims. And, on appeal, the Does challenge only
the district court's ruling on their § 1985(3) claims.      As we
describe in this section, we agree with the district court's



                                   - 31 -
                            IV. CONCLUSION

           For all these reasons, we vacate the dismissal of the

Does' § 1983 claims against the BPD and DCF defendants and the

City; affirm the dismissal of the Does' § 1985 claims against all

the defendants, as well as the Does' § 1983 claims against Rose

and   Frances;   and   remand   to   the   district   court   for   further

proceedings consistent with this opinion.        The parties shall bear

their own costs.




decision to dismiss the § 1985(3) claims on the ground that the
Does did not sufficiently allege that they are members of a
protected class. This rationale applies to the § 1985(3) claims
against each defendant, including the BPPA.


                                 - 32 -