United States Court of Appeals
                      For the First Circuit

No. 23-1305

              UNITED STATES EX REL. MARTIN FLANAGAN,

                      Plaintiff, Appellant,

                                v.

 FRESENIUS MEDICAL CARE HOLDINGS, INC., d/b/a Fresenius Medical
                       Care North America,

                       Defendant, Appellee.


          APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
               FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

        [Hon. F. Dennis Saylor, IV, U.S. District Judge]


                              Before

       Montecalvo, Thompson, and Kayatta, Circuit Judges.


     Jamie Michele Bennett, with whom Bennett Law, Christopher P.
Sullivan, Pamela E. Berman, Robins Kaplan LLP, W. Scott Simmer,
Noah M. Rich, and Baron & Budd, P.C., were on brief, for appellant.

     James F. Bennett, with whom Maria R. Durant, Hogan Lovells
LLP, Megan S. Heinsz, Hannah F. Preston, and Dowd Bennett LLP were
on brief, for appellee.

     Daniel Winik, Appellate Staff, Civil Division, U.S.
Department of Justice, with whom Brian M. Boynton, Principal Deputy
Assistant Attorney General, Joshua S. Levy, Acting U.S. Attorney,
Michael S. Raab, Appellate Staff, Civil Division, U.S. Department
of Justice, and Charles W. Scarborough, Appellate Staff, Civil
Division, U.S. Department of Justice, were on brief, for the United
States, amicus curiae.
June 27, 2025
              MONTECALVO, Circuit Judge.       Martin Flanagan brought this

qui    tam   suit   against   Fresenius      Medical   Care   Holdings,   Inc.

("Fresenius"), under the False Claims Act ("FCA"), 31 U.S.C.

§ 3729, alleging a fraudulent kickback scheme related to referrals

to    Fresenius-operated      dialysis    clinics.      The   district    court

dismissed Flanagan's complaint for failing to meet the heightened

pleading standard under Rule 9(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil

Procedure, among other reasons.           When Flanagan then sought leave

to amend his complaint, the district court also denied that motion.

Flanagan now appeals these decisions, arguing that the complaint

satisfied the heightened pleading standard necessary to assert

fraud claims and that the district court abused its discretion in

denying his motion for leave to amend.                 For the reasons that

follow, we affirm both decisions of the district court.

                               I. Background1

                               A. The Parties

              Fresenius is the country's largest dialysis services

provider.        Annually,    it   treats    nearly    190,000   patients    in

approximately 2,400 outpatient dialysis clinics across the United

States.      Flanagan worked for Fresenius for twenty-nine years, most

recently as Director of Acute Market Development for the Fresenius


       At this stage of the litigation, "[w]e draw the facts from
       1

the complaint, taking the well-pleaded facts as true and construing
all reasonable inferences in [Flanagan]'s favor." Zhou v. Desktop
Metal, Inc., 120 F.4th 278, 283 (1st Cir. 2024).


                                     - 3 -
Western Business Unit.     In that role, he was responsible for

negotiating contracts under which Fresenius provided dialysis

treatment to hospital inpatients.        He also, as detailed below,

observed what he believed to be an elaborate kickback scheme

utilized to induce referrals to Fresenius clinics.

                    B. Relevant Underlying Facts

                       1. Medical Background

           Chronic kidney disease is the progressive loss of a

person's   kidney   function,    which   is   typically   irreversible.

End-stage renal disease ("ESRD") is an advanced form of chronic

kidney disease -- also classified as stage 5 chronic kidney disease

-- that requires either dialysis treatments or a kidney transplant.

At the end of 2017, almost 750,000 patients in the United States

were suffering from ESRD. Many of those patients undergo a regular

regimen of dialysis treatments; about half of those patients begin

dialysis "emergently" after experiencing complications from kidney

failure.   The dialysis treatments are intended to replace some

functions typically performed by the kidney; during treatment a

patient's blood is gradually pumped through a device called a

dialyzer that filters out excess water, solutes, and toxins before

being returned to the body.     Often, patients also receive separate

injectable medications during their dialysis treatment.            Most

dialysis patients undergo treatment at a clinic three times per

week.


                                 - 4 -
                              2. Treatment Funding

             The    federal     government       helps   cover    costs   for    ESRD

treatment.       It does so primarily through two subsidized health

insurance programs: Medicare and Medicaid.2

                                     a. Medicare

             All patients with ESRD are eligible for benefits from

Medicare,    a     federally    funded    health     insurance     program.       The

Medicare program is administered through the Centers for Medicare

& Medicaid Services ("CMS"), an agency within the Department of

Health and Human Services.

             One    portion     of    Medicare      covers    dialysis       services

provided in outpatient clinics. Because of this coverage, Medicare

is the primary payor for more than 80% of ESRD patients in this

country for the cost of their dialysis treatments.                  These Medicare

expenditures exceed $40 billion annually.                    Medicare reimburses

providers at a composite rate for outpatient maintenance dialysis

services     (including        nursing    and     clinical       services,    social




     2 Other federal health programs also provide benefits to
patients with ESRD, including the Civilian Health and Medical
Program of the Uniformed Services (known as CHAMPUS/TRICARE),
which is administered by the U.S. Department of Defense for
individuals affiliated with the armed forces, and the Civilian
Health and Medical Program of the Department of Veterans Affairs
(known as CHAMPVA), which is administered by the U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs for the families of veterans. These programs
are not part of the claims in this case.


                                         - 5 -
services, supplies, equipment, and certain laboratory tests and

drugs).

            For Medicare reimbursement, ESRD treatment providers

submit one reimbursement claim bill per month for each patient,

which includes costs for dialysis treatment, laboratory costs, and

separately billable drugs.     These reimbursement claims include a

variety of data, including information about the patient and the

claims sought to be reimbursed.      Fiscal intermediaries contracting

with CMS process and pay out reimbursement claims.       These payments

are made directly to the ESRD treatment facilities; other entities

providing   services   --   such   as   laboratories,   suppliers,   and

physicians billing for ESRD-related drugs -- must then seek payment

from those facilities.

            Dialysis facilities must submit annual Medicare cost

reports.    These cost reports include a certification of adherence

to applicable laws and regulations.         The reports also include

information about the percentage of hours that medical directors

work at a dialysis facility.

                             b. Medicaid

            Medicaid, a joint federal-state program administered by

states, also provides payment for some costs for ESRD patients who

do not qualify for Medicare or for treatment costs not covered by

Medicare.   Although CMS administers Medicaid at the federal level,

each state sets its own guidelines regarding eligibility and


                                   - 6 -
services.   Funding for Medicaid comes from both the states and the

federal government, and the states then utilize a combination of

state and federal funds to pay claims submitted to Medicaid.

            Because   of   this   relationship    between    the    state   and

federal governments, states must submit certain forms to CMS to

receive federal funding for Medicaid.         These forms include claims

for reimbursement submitted to and paid through Medicaid.                   The

federal government then utilizes these forms to determine whether

any   fraudulent   claims    were   paid    and   may    later     recoup   any

erroneously paid funds by reducing the amount provided to the state

in the future.

                           C. Alleged Wrongdoing

            The amended complaint alleges that Fresenius created a

kickback scheme to wrongfully induce referrals.                  Because the

allegations regarding the kickback scheme are not directly at issue

here, we summarize the scheme below.

                   1. Fresenius Hospital Contracts

            Around 2007, Fresenius began to seek exclusive contracts

with hospitals to provide inpatient dialysis care in the hospital

setting.     Fresenius     instructed   mid-level       managers,    including

Flanagan, to obtain hospital contracts "at any cost," as this would

help the managers to later secure referrals for patients at that

hospital after they were discharged. To entice hospital contracts,

Fresenius severely limited the costs and fees that would be


                                    - 7 -
contractually passed on to the hospitals and did not enforce

certain provisions that would have increased costs.                         Fresenius

management specifically instructed Flanagan that entering into

these below-cost contracts was the company's standard business

practice.

             Accordingly, Fresenius budgeted for -- and incurred --

losses in some of its contracts with larger hospitals. Fresenius's

underlying goal for entering into these hospital contracts below

cost was to secure more referrals for its outpatient facilities,

thereby   more    than   making   up    for    its   losses    on     the   hospital

contracts.

             Efforts to sign hospital contracts intensified in late

2009 to early 2010, and several executives and upper-level managers

told marketing directors that "if you lose a hospital, we lose

referrals."      In 2010, Flanagan spoke with both his supervisor and

another executive in the company regarding his concerns that

Fresenius appeared to be buying referrals from hospitals with

below-cost contracts.        Flanagan was told that he should not

complain about or be concerned with this issue.                 Other employees

throughout the country had similar experiences regarding their

concerns about the below-cost hospital contracts.

                     2. Fresenius Medical Directors

             Separate from its hospital contracts, Fresenius also

contracted    with   hospital     nephrologists        to     serve    as    medical


                                       - 8 -
directors     at     Fresenius      outpatient       facilities.         Medicare

regulations require there to be a medical director overseeing the

operation and safety of each dialysis clinic.              42 C.F.R. § 494.150

(2025).     According to Flanagan, the regulations further require

that medical directors "devote sufficient time" to this position

and offer guidance that this time should amount to approximately

one quarter of a typical forty-hour work week.

            Fresenius targeted its recruiting of medical directors

at those nephrologists who were in positions to refer high numbers

of patients to Fresenius outpatient facilities.                Although not made

explicit    in   contracts,      medical     directors'    compensation     often

correlated with the number of patients the doctor had and would

increase as the number of patients in a clinic grew.

            Although there was significant variation among medical

directors' salaries, the medical directors were well-compensated.

These   salaries     were   often     more    than    double    those    paid   by

Fresenius's primary competitor in the same localities.                    Reports

from Fresenius claim that its medical directors worked eight to

ten hours per week.         However, Fresenius does not require its

medical directors document their time.

            Flanagan     personally        recollected     that    the    medical

directors    spent    little     to   no    time   at    Fresenius   outpatient

facilities.      He believed that their involvement was often limited

to monthly reviews of documents that required a medical director's


                                      - 9 -
signature, which took less than an hour of time.                     Flanagan's

experience was that Fresenius did not track the services that the

medical directors were performing.

             Medical    directors    could    also   have   a   difficult   time

leaving their positions.           All Fresenius medical directors sign

contracts     that     include      non-compete,     non-solicitation,       and

non-disparagement provisions.         To be released from the non-compete

provisions, the medical directors would have to negotiate buyouts.

               3. Fresenius Free or Below-Cost Services

             In addition to below-cost contracts, Fresenius offered

other benefits to hospitals, all allegedly tailored towards the

same overarching goal of securing as many patient referrals to its

facilities    as     possible.      The   amended    complaint    specifically

highlights    four     different    benefits:    (1) the    Bridge    Program;3




     3 This program provided free services to hospitals, which
included providing a Fresenius employee to perform certain tasks
and "funnel[]" ESRD patients to its own outpatient facilities.
These free services were valued at more than $10,000 annually per
hospital.


                                     - 10 -
(2) the Treatment Options Program;4 (3) value added services;5 and

(4) practice management services.6

                         4. Lease Agreements

           Fresenius entered extended, guaranteed lease agreements

for office space in physician-owned buildings.      These leases were

at rates above fair market value and were often guaranteed for

fifteen   years.   The   leases   also   included   annual   escalator

provisions.   On the other side of transactions, Fresenius leased

office space in buildings that it owned.       Fresenius leased these

spaces to its medical directors at rates below fair market value.




     4  Fresenius made this educational service available to
"interested hospitals, physicians, and community organizations,"
whether or not they participated in the Bridge Program.      The
program also promoted Fresenius's outpatient services.
     5 These "value added services" or "services beyond the rate"
included    free   nursing    services,    in-service   training,
transportation to and from dialysis treatments, and patient
education.
     6 These services provided physician practices with free or
below-cost services, including specialty advice and technology
solutions.    Fresenius communicated to doctors utilizing this
service that early referrals to Fresenius's outpatient clinics
could be profitable to physician practices.       Fresenius also
provided physicians with a free recruiting service targeting
nephrology fellows and practicing physicians to join the
physicians' practices. Sometimes, the physicians involved in this
service also entered into Confidentiality Agreements and Business
Associate Agreements, through which they received additional free
resources.


                               - 11 -
                     5. Joint Venture Agreements

             In 2007, Fresenius began entering into joint venture

agreements with nephrologists and other physicians, which allowed

partners to share in the management, profits, and losses of the

outpatient     dialysis    facilities.      Fresenius        anticipated   a

significant number of referrals to come from its joint venture

partners and put pressure on the partners to refer patients to

Fresenius clinics.        The joint venture agreements also included

non-compete clauses, which made it difficult for physicians to

leave the joint venture.

                          D. Procedural History

             In March 2014, Flanagan filed this qui tam suit against

Fresenius in the U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland,

alleging presentation of false claims in violation of the FCA,

31 U.S.C.    § 3729(a)(1)(A),    and   making   or   using   false   records

material to a false or fraudulent claim in violation of the FCA,

id. § 3729(a)(1)(B).

             The complaint was initially sealed to give the U.S.

Department of Justice time to investigate and determine whether

the United States would intervene, as occurs in all FCA qui tam

actions.     See United States ex rel. Nargol v. DePuy Orthopaedics,

Inc., 865 F.3d 29, 31-32 (1st Cir. 2017); see also United States

ex rel. Lovell v. AthenaHealth, Inc., 56 F.4th 152, 155 (1st Cir.

2022) ("A plaintiff's complaint may remain sealed for an extended


                                  - 12 -
period while the government investigates the allegations prior to

making its intervention decision.").    In June 2020, the government

declined to intervene.    Cf. United States ex rel. Ge v. Takeda

Pharm. Co., 737 F.3d 116, 119 (1st Cir. 2013) ("In a successful

qui tam action, the relator collects a portion of the award to the

government regardless of whether the government intervenes.").

The complaint was unsealed shortly thereafter.

          Fresenius moved to dismiss in January 2021. In response,

Flanagan filed the amended complaint in February 2021. The amended

complaint reasserted the claims under the FCA but also added over

100 pages of new allegations which detailed new fraudulent schemes

not previously alleged in the original complaint.

          In   the   amended   complaint,   Flanagan   alleged   that

Fresenius defrauded the government by

          [k]nowingly     offering     remuneration     to
          hospitals in the form of no-cost or below-cost
          items and services (including but not limited
          to free discharge planners) in connection with
          the provision of inpatient dialysis care to
          ESRD patients, at least one purpose of which
          was to secure referrals from those hospitals
          for patients who would enter outpatient care
          at Fresenius dialysis clinics, in violation of
          the   Anti-Kickback     Statute,     42   U.S.C.
          § 1320a-7b(b) ("AKS") and which did not meet
          safe harbor requirements; and [i]n violation
          of the AKS (and which did not meet safe harbor
          requirements),         knowingly        offering
          remuneration to physicians (at least one
          purpose of which was to reward or induce
          referrals    from     those     physicians    to
          Fresenius'[s] network of outpatient clinics),
          including:    medical     director    agreements


                               - 13 -
              ("MDAs") that were well above fair market
              value ("FMV") or commercially unreasonable;
              free patient education services and/or free or
              below-cost   practice   management    services
              (including free recruitment services for new
              nephrologists entering the workforce); lease
              agreements     that     were      commercially
              unreasonable and not at FMV[]; and joint
              venture     agreements . . . in     outpatient
              dialysis clinics that were commercially
              unreasonable and not at FMV.

              Fresenius subsequently filed a motion to transfer the

case from the District of Maryland.            The court granted Fresenius's

motion to transfer, and the case was transferred to the U.S.

District Court for the District of Massachusetts in October 2021.

              Once in the District of Massachusetts, Fresenius again

filed a motion to dismiss, seeking dismissal under Rules 9(b),

12(b)(1), and 12(b)(6) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.

In support of dismissal, Fresenius raised five separate issues:

(1) the amended complaint did not comply with the FCA's statutory

requirements for filing new claims under 31 U.S.C. § 3730(b)(2);

(2) the FCA's public-disclosure bar, 31 U.S.C. § 3730(e)(4), bars

Flanagan's claims related to Fresenius's joint venture agreements

and medical director arrangements; (3) the FCA's first-to-file

rule,    31   U.S.C.   § 3730(b)(5),     bars     Flanagan's   joint   venture

claims; (4) Flanagan did not allege sufficient facts to support

either a predicate violation of the AKS or a violation of the FCA

with the particularity required by Rule 9(b); and (5) Flanagan

failed   to    state   a   claim   for   FCA    conspiracy.    Specifically,


                                    - 14 -
Fresenius      argued   that     Flanagan        failed     to    adequately          plead

causation under the FCA.         Flanagan opposed the motion to dismiss.

            On May 23, 2022, the district court held a hearing on

the   motion    to    dismiss   and     ultimately        took    the    matter       under

advisement.      On December 5, 2022, the district court granted

Fresenius's motion to dismiss.            In doing so, the court considered

the     mandatory     pre-suit       requirements         under     the        FCA,     the

applications of the public-disclosure bar and the first-to-file

bar, and the pleading standards under Rule 9(b).

            First, the court explained that the amended complaint

added 125 pages of allegations and multiple new claims to the

original complaint.         Specifically, the original complaint -- which

complied with the FCA's filing requirements -- did not contain any

allegations     about    the    joint    venture     agreements         or     provisions

providing free services. The amended complaint, on the other hand,

did not comply with the FCA's mandatory filing requirements;

namely, it was not filed under seal, and the government was not

given    the   opportunity      to     determine     if     it    would        intervene.

Accordingly, the district court dismissed those new claims.

            Next, the district court found that, even if the joint

venture claims in the amended complaint met the FCA's filing

requirements,        they    were       further     precluded           by     both     the

public-disclosure and first-to-file bars.                    This was so because

another     lawsuit     filed    and     unsealed     prior        to        the   amended


                                        - 15 -
complaint -- Complaint,      United   States    ex   rel.   CKD   Project    v.

Fresenius Med. Care Holdings, 551 F. Supp. 3d 27 (E.D.N.Y. 2021)

(No. 14-cv-6646) -- contained allegations substantially similar to

those that Flanagan newly asserted regarding the joint venture

claims.    As to the public-disclosure bar, the district court

concluded that Flanagan's allegations did not "materially add" to

the   public   allegations    in   that     lawsuit.        And   as   to   the

first-to-file bar, the court determined that Flanagan alleged the

same scheme that was alleged in the prior lawsuit and no exceptions

to the first-to-file bar applied.              Thus, the district court

concluded that these were alternative bases for dismissing the

amended complaint's new claims regarding joint ventures.

          Lastly, the district court determined that the amended

complaint, although lengthy and detailed regarding how claims are

submitted generally and how Fresenius's alleged kickback scheme

functioned, still failed to state a claim under the FCA because

there were not "particularized allegations of claims for payment

arising from that scheme."         The district court also determined

that, under Rule 9(b), the amended complaint did not describe the

false claims with the requisite level of specificity.                   As to

Medicare claims specifically, which Fresenius submitted directly

to the federal government, the district court found that Flanagan

had not identified a single specific false claim or provided any

representative or sample claims, as required.           The district court


                                   - 16 -
also expressed doubt that the amended complaint adequately pled

causation as required by the relevant statutes. Although the court

also suggested that but-for causation was the proper standard, it

ultimately decided the motion on other grounds.         Accordingly, the

district court also found dismissal appropriate under Rule 9(b).

            In   January   2023,     Flanagan   filed   a   motion   for

reconsideration and a motion to amend the amended complaint.         The

district court denied both motions.         As to the motion to amend,

the district court recognized that the case was, at that time,

nearly nine years old and that Fresenius had filed three different

motions to dismiss, all of which targeted Flanagan's failure to

plead any false claims with particularity.       For these reasons, the

district court found that the "extensive delays" and "obvious

prejudice to defendant" were sufficient reasons to deny the motion

to amend.

            Flanagan then filed a timely notice of appeal as to the

order dismissing the complaint, the order denying his motion for

reconsideration, and the order denying his motion for leave to

file a second amended complaint.

                            II. Discussion

            On appeal, Flanagan asserts that the district court made

two central errors: first, that it should not have dismissed claims

for failing to satisfy Rule 9(b); and second, that it abused its

discretion in denying his motion to amend.              The first issue


                                   - 17 -
requires us to examine only the claims and allegations that the

district court dismissed under Rule 9(b); thus, we do not address

the alternative grounds for dismissal (in other words, we leave

undisturbed the district court's rulings on the failure to meet

statutory     requirements,     the    public-disclosure      bar,    and    the

first-to-file bar).         We address the granting of the motion to

dismiss and the denial of the motion to amend in turn.

                            A. Motion to Dismiss

                           1. Standard of Review

             A district court's decision granting a motion to dismiss

is subject to de novo review.           See Zhou v. Desktop Metal, Inc.,

120 F.4th 278, 287 (1st Cir. 2024).            Our review "requires that we

separate    factual    allegations      from    conclusory    ones    and   then

evaluate whether the factual allegations support a 'reasonable

inference     that   the   defendant     is    liable   for   the    misconduct

alleged.'"     United States ex rel. Zotos v. Town of Hingham, 98

F.4th 339, 343 (1st Cir. 2024) (quoting Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556

U.S. 662, 678 (2009)).       Because Flanagan alleges fraud claims, the

complaint must also satisfy the heightened pleading standard under

Rule 9(b), which requires the circumstances of fraud to be alleged

with particularity.        See Zhou, 120 F.4th at 287; United States ex

rel. Karvelas v. Melrose-Wakefield Hosp., 360 F.3d 220, 228 (1st

Cir. 2004) (holding that "Rule 9(b) applies to claims under the




                                      - 18 -
FCA"), abrogated on other grounds by, Allison Engine Co. v. United

States ex rel. Sanders, 553 U.S. 662 (2008).

          Before examining the sufficiency of the complaint here,

we first provide a brief overview of the relevant statutes.

                       2. Statutory Background

          Flanagan's    allegations     center    on   two    interlinked

statutes: the FCA and the AKS.    We briefly describe the relevant

portions of each statute.

                       a. The False Claims Act

          The FCA "is an 'expansive' statute, intended 'to reach

all types of fraud, without qualification, that might result in

financial loss to the [g]overnment.'"            United States ex rel.

Escobar v. Universal Health Servs., Inc., 780 F.3d 504, 512 (1st

Cir. 2015) (cleaned up) (quoting Cook County v. United States ex

rel. Chandler, 538 U.S. 119, 129 (2003)), vacated on other grounds,

Universal Health Servs., Inc. v. United States, 579 U.S. 176

(2016).   The FCA holds liable anyone who "knowingly presents, or

causes to be presented, a false or fraudulent claim for payment or

approval" or who "knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made or

used, a false record or statement material to a false or fraudulent

claim."   31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(A), (B).         "For purposes of the

statute, 'a claim includes direct requests to the government for

payment as well as reimbursement requests made to the recipients

of federal funds under federal benefit programs.'"           Guilfoile v.


                               - 19 -
Shields, 913 F.3d 178, 187 (1st Cir. 2019) (cleaned up) (quoting

Universal Health Servs., Inc., 579 U.S. at 181).

                  b. The Anti-Kickback Statute

          Flanagan's FCA claims are rooted in alleged violations

of the AKS, which prohibits, among other things, "knowingly and

willfully offer[ing] or pay[ing] any remuneration (including any

kickback, bribe, or rebate) directly or indirectly, overtly or

covertly, in cash or in kind to any person to induce such person"

either "to refer an individual to a person for the furnishing or

arranging for the furnishing of any item or service for which

payment may be made in whole or in part under a Federal health

care program" or "to purchase, lease, order, or arrange for or

recommend purchasing, leasing, or ordering any good, facility,

service, or item for which payment may be made in whole or in part

under a Federal health care program."   42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(b)(2).

          "The AKS was designed to prevent medical providers from

making decisions based on improper financial incentives rather

than medical necessity and to ensure that federal health care

programs do not bear the costs of such decisions."   United States

ex rel. Banigan v. PharMerica, Inc., 950 F.3d 134, 137 (1st Cir.

2020).   "Essentially, the AKS targets any remunerative scheme

through which a person is 'paid in return for referrals' to a

program under which payments may be made from federal funds."

Guilfoile, 913 F.3d at 189 (quoting United States v. Patel, 778


                             - 20 -
F.3d 607, 618 (7th Cir. 2015)).                  There is no question that

liability under the FCA can be predicated on a violation of the

AKS.   See id.; Banigan, 950 F.3d at 137.             There are two pathways

to FCA liability for an AKS violation: (1) "when someone falsely

represents compliance with a material requirement that there be no

AKS violation in connection with the claim," United States v.

Regeneron Pharms., Inc. ("Regeneron"), 128 F.4th 324, 333 (1st

Cir. 2025), and (2) when claims for payment are made "resulting

from" AKS violations, 42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(g).               Flanagan asserts

that the amended complaint presents claims under both pathways.

             We have recently interpreted the meaning of "resulting

from" under the AKS.        See Regeneron, 128 F.4th at 328-36.          In so

doing, this court concluded that "to demonstrate falsity" under a

theory that the claim resulted from an AKS violation, the plaintiff

"must show that an illicit kickback was the but-for cause of a

submitted claim."          Id. at 336.          Put another way, the phrase

"resulting from" requires actual causality, which "demands proof

'that the harm would not have occurred but for the defendant's

conduct.'"        Id. at 329 (cleaned up) (quoting Univ. of Tex. Sw.

Med. Ctr. v. Nassar, 570 U.S. 338, 346-47 (2013)).

                                3. False Claims

             We    now   take   on   Flanagan's    core   allegations   of    FCA

violations,       concluding    that    the     amended   complaint   fails    to

adequately plead that the alleged AKS violations were the but-for


                                       - 21 -
cause of the submitted claims or that Fresenius falsely certified

that it complied with the AKS.

                        a. "Resulting From" Claims

           The issue of causation has loomed as a potential threat

to Flanagan's claims since the outset of this lawsuit.                 In its

motion to dismiss, Fresenius argued that the complaint failed to

establish causation, citing the but-for standard applied by the

district   court   in   United   States    v.   Regeneron   Pharms.,    Inc.,

No. 20-11217, 2020 WL 7130004, at *14 (D. Mass. Dec. 4, 2020).             In

resolving the motion to dismiss, the district court suggested that

but-for causation may be required but decided that motion on other

grounds.   Our circuit had not yet decided the issue, so on appeal,

Flanagan initially argued that but-for causation was not required,

but, even if it was, the complaint was adequate.             Subsequently,

Regeneron resolved the issue, and Flanagan now acknowledges that

the law in this circuit requires such a standard.7            We now focus

on Flanagan's alternative argument -- that the amended complaint

adequately pleads       but-for causation by articulating        "specific

compensation relationships with specific physicians which were

intended to and did result in referrals."             Flanagan's briefing



     7 On March 7, 2025, Flanagan filed a letter with the Clerk's
Office under Rule 28(j) of the Federal Rules of Appellate
Procedure. In that letter, Flanagan conceded that our decision in
Regeneron resolved the issue of what standard of causation should
be applied.


                                  - 22 -
goes on to focus on claims relating to only one physician -- thus,

we do the same.8

                In particular, Flanagan focuses on the allegations that

Dr.    Stephen      Tilles    held   two   medical   director   positions   with

Fresenius, that his compensation in those roles was meant to induce

referrals, and that Tilles and his practice referred sixty patients

to Fresenius clinics in 2012.              The amended complaint also alleges

that       a   Fresenius   report    stated   that   "Dr. Tilles['s]   contract

renewal is critical.             Currently, he is [the] only physician

referring to San Jose and has [the] majority of Los Gatos.                   He

must be secured for at least one more year at San Jose and

indefinitely in Los Gatos."           The amended complaint further alleges

that Fresenius tracked the number of patients that Tilles referred

to non-Fresenius clinics.

                These allegations, though, do nothing to tell us whether

Tilles's referrals resulted from the alleged kickback scheme.

There are no allegations that Tilles would not have made these

referrals had he not been given the medical director position.               At

a minimum, Flanagan was required to plead some information that

would have allowed us to reasonably infer in his favor that

causation exists.            Accordingly, the amended complaint lacks the


       Flanagan's Rule 28(j) letter similarly only cited to the
       8

portions of the amended complaint that refer to a single physician
in support of the proposition that the amended complaint satisfied
the but-for causation standard.


                                       - 23 -
detail needed to plausibly allege but-for causation.         See United

States ex rel. Martin v. Hathaway, 63 F.4th 1043, 1053 (6th Cir.

2023) (finding that but-for causation was not plausibly alleged

when "[t]here's not one claim for reimbursement identified with

particularity in this case that would not have occurred anyway");

see also Stop Ill. Health Care Fraud, LLC v. Sayeed, 100 F.4th

899, 909 (7th Cir. 2024) (noting that but-for causation would be

established if plaintiff could show that "the defendants would not

have provided service to [the relevant] patients" in the absence

of the fraudulent referral scheme).       Without any further details,

no reasonable inference can be made in Flanagan's favor as to

causation.     See Comcast Corp. v. Nat'l Ass'n of Afr. Am.-Owned

Media, 589 U.S. 327, 331-32, 336 (2020) (holding that but-for

causation must be adequately pled and that such a rule cannot "be

overlooked or modified in the early stages of a case").

             Thus, Flanagan's claims arising under the theory that

the   reimbursement   claims   resulted    from   AKS   violations   were

properly dismissed because the amended complaint failed to allege

but-for causation.

                    b. False Representation Claims

             Flanagan next argues that he has separate claims under

31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(B) that the district court did not address.




                                - 24 -
As a reminder, under subsection (a)(1)(B),9 a defendant can be held

liable when they "knowingly make[], use[], or cause[] to be made

or used, a false record or statement material to a false or

fraudulent claim."             Further, "[t]he defendant must have 'intended

the [g]overnment to rely on that false statement as a condition of

payment.'"         United States ex rel. Gagne v. City of Worcester, 565

F.3d 40, 46 (1st Cir. 2009) (cleaned up) (quoting Allison Engine

Co.,       553   U.S.     at   672).     Unlike       the   "resulting   from"    claims

addressed above, these types of claims do not require proof of

causation.         See Regeneron, 128 F.4th at 333-34.

                 Flanagan argues that the amended complaint alleges that

Fresenius made false records by falsely certifying its compliance

with the AKS annually and by falsely certifying cost reports that

listed the number of hours that its medical directors work.                           He

recites the details the complaint alleges regarding the kickback

scheme       and    the    allegedly     tainted       referrals   and    argues    that

"Fresenius fully intended to bill all payors, including federal

health       care       programs,      for    treatments      resulting    from    each

referral."

                 However, the complaint is not as specific as Flanagan

asserts.         First, the complaint alleges that submitting certain



       Subsection (a)(1)(B) was formerly subsection (a)(2) under
       9

the FCA. See United States ex rel. Gagne v. City of Worcester,
565 F.3d 40, 46 (1st Cir. 2009).


                                             - 25 -
certifications and information in forms is required under the

Medicare program and then broadly alleges that every Fresenius

clinic submits these forms every year.              But Flanagan has not

pointed us to any allegations in the complaint that address what

Fresenius   actually   submitted     in   those    reports,   either    as   to

certifications    or   as    to   hours   worked   by   medical   directors.

Further, with respect to the overarching kickback scheme, he still

must plead with particularity the connection between false records

and/or statements and the intent to have a false claim paid for by

the government programs.          See Gagne, 565 F.3d at 46.           Broadly

stating that Fresenius intended to have all claims paid, whether

or not tainted by the kickback scheme, is not sufficient to satisfy

our heightened standard under Rule 9(b).

            For   these        reasons,      Flanagan's       claim     under

subsection (a)(1)(B) was also properly dismissed.

                             B. Motion to Amend

            This court reviews the denial of a motion to amend for

abuse of discretion.        Ge, 737 F.3d at 127.

            Flanagan argues that, in denying his motion to amend,

the district court failed to identify any actual prejudice to

Fresenius or explain why his motion constituted an "undue delay."

Flanagan asserts that because there has yet to be discovery in

this case and there is no trial date, Fresenius would not be

prejudiced by an amendment simply because the case had been pending


                                    - 26 -
for   nearly    a    decade     at   the    time    of    the   proposed    amendment.

Further, because Flanagan, in his opening brief, primarily focuses

on whether he sufficiently pled a false claim, he emphasizes that

he did not have the necessary claims data needed to amend his

complaint until after the motion to dismiss was decided, and,

therefore, he could not have amended his complaint until that time.

           "Amendments may be permitted pre-judgment, even after a

dismissal for failure to state a claim, and leave to amend is

freely given when justice so requires."                       Id. (quoting Palmer v.

Champion Mortg., 465 F.3d 24, 30 (1st Cir. 2006)).                       "Nonetheless,

grounds for denying leave include 'undue delay, bad faith or

dilatory   motive[,]       repeated         failure      to   cure   deficiencies    by

amendments previously allowed, undue prejudice to the opposing

party[,]    and      futility        of    amendment.'"          Kader     v.    Sarepta

Therapeutics, Inc., 887 F.3d 48, 60 (1st Cir. 2018) (cleaned up)

(quoting ACA Fin. Guar. Corp. v. Advest, Inc., 512 F.3d 46, 55-56

(1st Cir. 2008)).       Although our amendment rules are "liberal," the

district court has "significant latitude" in determining whether

to allow leave to amend.             Id. at 60-61 (quoting Advest, Inc., 512

F.3d at 55).         "[N]otably, 'undue delay in moving to amend, even

standing alone,' can provide a court with adequate grounds to deny

leave."    Id. at 61 (quoting Zullo v. Lombardo, 755 F.3d 1, 3 (1st

Cir. 2014)).         "[W]e have explicitly condemned a 'wait and see'

approach   to       pleading,    whereby      plaintiffs        'having    the   needed


                                           - 27 -
information, deliberately wait in the wings with another amendment

to a complaint should the court hold the first amended complaint

was insufficient.'"        Id. (cleaned up) (quoting Advest, Inc., 512

F.3d at 57).

            As discussed above, the original complaint was filed in

March   2014    and    there   was    some   delay   in   the   case   while   the

government decided whether to intervene.             However, Fresenius filed

its first motion to dismiss in January 2021, raising substantially

the same arguments that are now before us.                  Although Flanagan

attempted      to   cure   these     deficiencies    by   filing   the   amended

complaint in February 2021, the government filed another motion to

dismiss in March 2021, again asserting substantially the same

arguments raised in its previous motion and now raised before us.

Once the case was transferred to the District of Massachusetts,

Fresenius (now for the third time) filed its motion to dismiss in

January 2022.         Only after the district court issued its order,

almost a year after the most recent motion to dismiss was filed,

did Flanagan then file his motion to amend the complaint.

            Although Flanagan argued, both to the district court and

before us, that this delay should be excused because he did not

receive the claims information until after the motion to dismiss

was granted, he has not provided the court with any information as

to when he sought this claims information or why this claims

information was needed to plead causation.                  Without more from


                                       - 28 -
Flanagan, the district court could reasonably conclude that --

although Flanagan was aware of Fresenius's arguments and the

potential need for an amendment for two years -- he waited until

after the district court granted the motion to dismiss to seek the

claims information he allegedly needed to amend his complaint.

This two-year period is significantly longer than periods of time

we have previously relied upon in upholding denials of leave to

amend on undue delay grounds.    See id.

          Accordingly,   the   district    court   did   not   abuse   its

discretion in denying Flanagan's motion for leave to amend, and we

affirm.

                          III. Conclusion

          For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the decisions of

the district court granting the motion to dismiss in favor of

Fresenius and denying Flanagan's motion to amend.




                                - 29 -