United States Court of Appeals
                        For the First Circuit


No. 24-1971

                             DAVID KEANE,

                        Plaintiff, Appellant,

                                  v.

          EXPEDITORS INTERNATIONAL OF WASHINGTON, INC.;
                  EXPEDITORS HONG KONG LIMITED,

                        Defendants, Appellees.


          APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
               FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

              [Hon. Patti B. Saris, U.S. District Judge]


                                Before

                   Montecalvo, Lynch, and Kayatta,
                           Circuit Judges.


     Jeremia A. Pollard, with whom Hannon Lerner was on brief, for
appellant.

     Asha A. Santos, with whom Matthew J. Lynch        and   Littler
Mendelson, P.C. were on brief, for appellees.


                             May 27, 2025
           LYNCH, Circuit Judge.             David Keane's employment with

Expeditors Hong Kong Limited ("Expeditors HK") was terminated on

December 11, 2023.      In response, he sued not only Expeditors HK,

but also Expeditors International of Washington, Inc. ("Expeditors

US"), in the District of Massachusetts.             Expeditors HK is a wholly

owned subsidiary of Expeditors US.             Keane's suit brought federal

and state law claims, all arising out of, or connected to, the

termination of his employment in Hong Kong.               Defendants moved to

dismiss all of Keane's claims against both defendants for lack of

personal   jurisdiction        and   under    the   doctrine     of   forum   non

conveniens, and the federal law claim against both defendants also

for improper venue.       Defendants argued that the district court

"should    reject    [Keane's]       transparent       attempt   to   bootstrap

jurisdiction over Expeditors HK based upon unfounded, conclusory

assertions that Expeditors HK is an alter ego of Expeditors US."

Both sides filed supporting affidavits.

           The      district     court       granted    defendants'      motion,

dismissing the claims against Expeditors HK and the non-contract

claims against Expeditors US for lack of personal jurisdiction and

the contract claims against Expeditors US under the doctrine of

forum non conveniens.          The court rejected Keane's argument that

"Expeditors HK is subject to personal jurisdiction as Expeditors

US's alter ego" because, "[b]esides pointing to the overlapping

leadership of the companies, Keane [had] offer[ed] no evidence to


                                      - 2 -
refute the fact that Expeditors US and Expeditors HK observe

corporate formalities as distinct entities."

           Keane appeals and we affirm the dismissals, albeit on

somewhat different reasoning than that used by the district court.

We hold that the Massachusetts federal district court lacked

personal jurisdiction over Expeditors HK.       As to Keane's claims

against Expeditors US, dismissal was proper because, as Keane's

counsel,   quite   properly,   essentially   conceded,   Keane   cannot

prevail on any of these claims without proving he was wrongfully

terminated by Expeditors HK,      and Keane has failed      to allege

sufficient facts    or legal theories    to impute the actions of

Expeditors HK to Expeditors US.

                                  I.

           Under the prima facie approach used by the district

court, "[w]e draw the relevant facts from 'the pleadings and

whatever supplemental filings (such as affidavits) are contained

in the record, giving credence to the plaintiff's version of

genuinely contested facts.'"      Ward v. AlphaCore Pharma LLC, 89

F.4th 203, 209 (1st Cir. 2023) (quoting Baskin-Robbins Franchising

LLC v. Alpenrose Dairy, Inc., 825 F.3d 28, 34 (1st Cir. 2016)).

It is the plaintiff's burden to proffer facts "that, if credited,

would support all findings 'essential to personal jurisdiction.'"

Id. (quoting Chen v. U.S. Sports Acad., Inc., 956 F.3d 45, 51 (1st

Cir. 2020)).   "[W]e do not 'credit conclusory allegations or draw


                                 - 3 -
farfetched inferences.'"               Id. (quoting Ticketmaster-N.Y., Inc. v.

Alioto, 26 F.3d 201, 203 (1st Cir. 1994)).

                  Keane was employed by Expeditors US and worked in its

facility in Peabody, Massachusetts, from 1998 to 2018.                           In 2016,

an officer of Expeditors US, who Keane's complaint alleges was

acting       on    behalf      of    Expeditors     HK,      approached     Keane        about

transferring his employment to Hong Kong.                       His complaint alleges

that       during      their    negotiations,       he       "reached   a   mutual       oral

agreement"         with   Expeditors        US   that    his    "move   would   be       of   a

temporary         nature,"     and    Expeditors        US    "agreed   that    [Keane's]

employment status would remain with Expeditors [US]."                            In 2018,

Keane entered into a written employment agreement setting forth

the terms of his Hong Kong relocation, which stated his employment

would be with the Expeditors US North Asia Regional Office and was

signed "[f]or and on behalf of Expeditors [US]."1                              Under that

agreement, Keane moved to and began working in Hong Kong in

September 2018.

                  On   September      25,   2023,       Keane   entered     into     a    new

employment contract under which he continued to work in Hong Kong

at the Expeditors HK offices and which undisputably designated


       1  Notwithstanding the language of the 2018 agreement,
appellees argue that the agreement switched Keane's employment to
Expeditors HK.    We credit Keane's version of these genuinely
disputed facts, see Ward, 89 F.4th at 209, and, in any event, our
disposition of this case does not turn on this.



                                            - 4 -
Expeditors HK as his employer. 2               The affidavit of Kaiser Lam,

Regional Vice President of Expeditors HK, states, inter alia:

              Expeditors   HK   is   not   incorporated   in
              Massachusetts and does not maintain its
              principal place of business in Massachusetts.
              Expeditors HK is not registered to do business
              in Massachusetts, . . . does not maintain any
              office in Massachusetts, does not own any
              properties in Massachusetts and does not have
              any employees in Massachusetts. As a company
              organized under the laws of Hong Kong and
              registered to do business in Hong Kong,
              Expeditors HK has sued and been sued in Hong
              Kong courts. After Plaintiff's relocation to
              Hong Kong in 2018, Expeditors HK maintained
              and   administered    Plaintiff's   employment
              records in Hong Kong. Expeditors HK maintains
              its own ledgers and accounting books; prepares
              its own business plans, payroll, budget and
              financial    statements;    administers    and
              controls its own health plan and related
              benefits; and controls the decisions regarding
              hiring and firing of its employees.

              Keane's      complaint   alleges    he   was   informed   that   a

coworker      made   a    sexual   harassment    allegation    concerning   his

conduct toward her at a September 21, 2023, Expeditors HK event in

Hong       Kong.         Expeditors    HK   investigated      the   allegation,

interviewing Keane and other individuals in or around Hong Kong,

and subjected Keane to a disciplinary proceeding.




       2  Keane argues that the 2023 agreement was a "calculated
move" by appellees to "divest the U.S. District Court of
jurisdiction over his claims," and from this attempts to argue
that the district court had jurisdiction over his claims.       We
reject the argument, which is unsupported by specific facts or any
legal    authority    and    runs    counter    to    foundational
freedom-of-contract principles.


                                       - 5 -
              On December 11, 2023, Keane's employment was terminated

by   letter    from    Expeditors         HK,    which      stated      that     the     sexual

harassment allegation had been "substantiated," his actions were

"a serious violation of Expeditors' Code of Business Conduct," and

"[t]his was the second allegation of sexual harassment made against

[him]."       Keane's complaint alleges that "the only antecedent

instance of a sexual harassment claim involving [him] dates back

to   the    period    of     2014    to    2015,"        when      he    was     located      in

Massachusetts       and     employed      by    Expeditors        US.      His     complaint

alleges,     but    without    any     supporting        facts,         that    the    CEO    of

Expeditors     US    "had    secretly       developed        a    plan     to    reduce      the

workforce by 2,000" and had "personally sanctioned the termination

of   [his]     employment."          His       complaint         further       alleges     that

"Expeditors HK shares common management with Expeditors [US]," and

that "Expeditors [US] wields direct and substantial command over

the business activities of Expeditors HK."

                                           II.

              "When a district court reviews a motion to dismiss under

the prima facie standard, . . . our review is de novo," Bluetarp

Fin., Inc. v. Matrix Const. Co., 709 F.3d 72, 79 (1st Cir. 2013),

under      which    "[w]e    are     not       bound   by     the       district       court's

reasoning . . . [and] are free to uphold the judgment on any ground

supported by the record," Ward, 89 F.4th at 209.




                                           - 6 -
              At the core of each count of Keane's complaint, including

those      against   Expeditors   US,    is   his   allegation   that   he   was

"unlawfully" and "summarily" terminated by Expeditors HK.3 Indeed,

when asked at oral argument whether Keane has any claims remaining

without Expeditors HK and without proving his termination by

Expeditors HK was wrongful, Keane's counsel conceded that most

such       claims    would   "probably    not"      survive   and   would    be

"problematic."4

              As to the claims against Expeditors HK, we affirm the

district court's dismissal for lack of personal jurisdiction on

the independently sufficient ground that, even crediting Keane's

allegations as to Expeditors HK's conduct in Massachusetts, that

alleged conduct is not, as is required by the Due Process Clause,

"an important, or [at least] material, element of proof" for these




       3  Keane's complaint brings six counts: breach of the 2018
oral and written contracts against Expeditors US; breach of the
2023 contract against Expeditors HK; and discrimination in
violation of Title VII, tortious interference with business
relations, and negligent infliction of emotional distress against
both.

       4  Keane's counsel, during rebuttal at oral argument,
stated that the interference with prospective business relations
count brought against both defendants "may be a surviving claim."
That argument fails because this claim, too, is tied to Expeditors
HK's allegedly wrongful termination of Keane's employment.      The
claim challenges Expeditors HK's investigation into the allegedly
false sexual harassment allegation against Keane and its failure
to halt rumors spread by one of its employees about that allegation
and as to other matters, and the sexual harassment allegation led
to the termination of Keane's employment.


                                    - 7 -
claims.       Platten v. HG Bermuda Exempted Ltd., 437 F.3d 118, 137

(1st       Cir.    2006)    (alteration    in   original)    (quoting      Harlow   v.

Child.'s Hosp., 432 F.3d 50, 61 (1st Cir. 2005)).                    Expeditors HK

has offered evidence that "Expeditors HK maintains its own ledgers

and accounting books; prepares its own business plans, payroll,

budget and financial statements; administers and controls its own

health plan and related benefits; and controls the decisions

regarding hiring and firing of its employees," which Keane has

failed       to     rebut    beyond   "conclusory     allegations"      and      facts

requiring us to draw "farfetched inferences."                    Ward, 89 F.4th at

209 (quoting Alioto, 26 F.3d at 203).

                  The   claims   against   Expeditors       US   attempt    to    hold

Expeditors US accountable for the actions of Expeditors HK in

terminating Keane's employment.                 But Keane's complaint contains

insufficient allegations or even a request to pierce the corporate

veil, nor does it allege sufficient facts on which Expeditors US

can be held liable for Expeditors HK's actions.5                 In short, Keane's


       5  Keane alleges in his complaint that "the CEO of
Expeditors [US] is a director of Expeditors HK" and states in his
affidavit that the Senior Vice President of Expeditors US is also
a Director of Expeditors HK, but "common management, alone,
generally will not permit disregard of the formal barriers between
separate legal entities."    Middlesex Ret. Sys., LLC v. Bd. Of
Assessors of Billerica, 903 N.E.2d 210, 217 (Mass. 2009).      His
complaint further alleges that "Expeditors HK is required to
implement and follow the Code of Business Conduct, personnel
policies, and business directives promulgated by Expeditors [US],"
but this hardly rises to the level of "pervasive control." See
Lipsitt v. Plaud, 994 N.E.2d 777, 788 (Mass. 2013).


                                          - 8 -
complaint does not allege facts sufficient for "a determination

that     the   parent     corporation      directed     and    controlled      the

subsidiary, and used it for an improper purpose," as required to

"disregard     settled    expectations     accompanying       corporate     form."

Scott v. NG U.S. 1, Inc., 881 N.E.2d 1125, 1132 (Mass. 2008); see

also Lipsitt, 994 N.E.2d at 788 (There are "twelve factors which

should be considered in deciding whether to penetrate the corporate

form,"    such    as    "thin   capitalization"       and    "nonobservance     of

corporate formalities." (first quoting Evans v. Multicon Constr.

Corp., 574 N.E.2d 395, 398 (Mass. Ct. App. 1991); and then quoting

Att'y Gen. v. M.C.K., Inc., 736 N.E.2d 373, 380 n.19 (Mass.

2000))). This court has dismissed like efforts to ignore corporate

formalities in claims of wrongful termination of employment. See

Baez v. Baymark Detoxification Servs., Inc., 123 F.4th 62, 66-67

(1st   Cir.    2024)    (dismissing   Massachusetts         state   law   wrongful

termination claim because, even though plaintiff's employer was

defendant's      sister   company,    it   was   undisputed     that      defendant

"exercised no control over [plaintiff]" and had "[no] relationship

employment-based or otherwise" to plaintiff); DeLia v. Verizon

Commc'ns Inc., 656 F.3d 1, 5 (1st Cir. 2011) (dismissing Title VII

claim against defendant, because, even though plaintiff's employer

was a subsidiary of defendant, plaintiff had "failed to demonstrate

that [defendant] had any control over the 'manner and means' by

which she performed her job" (quoting Alberty-Vélez v. Corp. de


                                      - 9 -
P.R. para la Difusión Pública, 361 F.3d 1, 7 (1st Cir. 2004))).

And "[s]uit cannot be brought against the wrong defendant simply

because    the   correct   defendant . . . has   not   registered   to   do

business within the forum state."      Baez, 123 F.4th at 67. 6

            We affirm the judgment of dismissal.           No costs are

awarded.




     6    Because we affirm the dismissal of the claims against
Expeditors US on this alternate ground, we need not address Keane's
arguments that the district court abused its discretion in
dismissing the contract claims against Expeditors US under the
doctrine of forum non conveniens.


                                  - 10 -