United States Court of Appeals
                       For the First Circuit


No. 24-1138

              NATIONAL TRUST FOR HISTORIC PRESERVATION;
                FRIENDS OF THE FRANK J. WOOD BRIDGE,

                       Plaintiffs, Appellants,

  HISTORIC BRIDGE FOUNDATION; WATERFRONT MAINE, BRUNSWICK, LLC,

                             Plaintiffs,

                                 v.

  PETER PAUL MONTGOMERY BUTTIGIEG, in his official capacity as
  Secretary of the United States Department of Transportation;
    SHAILEN BHATT, in his official capacity as Administrator,
 Federal Highway Administration; TODD JORGENSEN, in his official
 capacity as Administrator, Federal Highway Administration Maine
      Division; BRUCE VAN NOTE, in his official capacity as
        Commissioner, Maine Department of Transportation,

                       Defendants, Appellees.


          APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                    FOR THE DISTRICT OF MAINE

           [Hon. Lance E. Walker, U.S. District Judge]


                               Before

                     Gelpí, Kayatta, and Aframe,
                           Circuit Judges.



     Christopher M. Cody, with whom Elizabeth S. Merritt and Andrea
C. Ferster were on brief, for appellants.
     John Emad Arbab, Attorney, Environment and Natural Resources
Division, U.S. Department of Justice, with whom Todd Kim, Assistant
Attorney General, Environment and Natural Resources Division, U.S.
Department of Justice, Joan M. Pepin, Attorney, Environment and
Natural Resources Division, U.S. Department of Justice, and Silvio
J. Morales, Attorney, U.S. Department of Transportation, were on
brief, for appellees Peter Paul Montgomery Buttigieg, Shailen
Bhatt, and Todd Jorgensen.
     Thomas A. Knowlton, Deputy Attorney General of Maine, with
whom Aaron M. Frey, Attorney General of Maine, and Anne M. Pare,
Chief Counsel, Maine Department of Transportation, were on brief,
for appellee Bruce Van Note.


                         January 10, 2025
            KAYATTA, Circuit Judge.                We consider for a fourth time

the fate of the Frank J. Wood Bridge ("the Bridge"), a key piece

of Maine's infrastructure connecting the municipalities of Topsham

and Brunswick.     Built in 1932, the Bridge is no longer capable of

safely performing its needed role, and traffic restrictions and

eventual      closure        will     likely        result        absent     substantial

rehabilitation or replacement.

            Maine's Department of Transportation (MDOT) concluded

that replacement makes more sense than rehabilitation.                            Because

federal    funds   will      be     used    to    replace    the       Bridge,   MDOT   was

therefore required to obtain the approval of the Federal Highway

Administration (FHWA) and to comply with several federal statutes,

including -- because the Bridge is part of a historic district and

is   itself    historic        --     section 4(f)          of    the     Department    of

Transportation (DOT) Act. See DOT Act, Pub. L. No. 89-670, § 4(f),

80 Stat. 931, 932 (1966), codified as amended at 49 U.S.C. § 303(c)

(limiting approvals of projects which "use" a protected property

to   situations       where       there      is     "no     prudent        and   feasible

alternative");     23     C.F.R.      § 774.17       (2024)       (providing     that    an

alternative is not "prudent" under section 4(f) if it "results in

additional construction, maintenance, or operational costs of an

extraordinary magnitude"); see also 54 U.S.C. § 306108 (requiring

federal    agencies     to    "take        into   account        the   effect    of   [any]

undertaking on any historic property").                      Over the objections of


                                           - 3 -
pro-preservation groups -- including the plaintiffs prosecuting

this appeal -- the FHWA granted MDOT approval under section 4(f)

to replace the Bridge.

           A petition for review to the district court followed,

Hist. Bridge Found. v. Chao, 517 F. Supp. 3d 9 (D. Me. 2021), in

which   plaintiffs     and   others    presented     "a    slew   of   line-item

challenges to various [agency] calculations," Hist. Bridge Found.

v. Buttigieg, 22 F.4th 275, 281 (1st Cir. 2022).                  The district

court rejected all of plaintiffs' challenges.              Hist. Bridge Found.

v. Chao, 517 F. Supp. 3d at 32.

           Plaintiffs' first appeal to this court followed.                      We

rejected all of plaintiffs' challenges, save one.                 Hist. Bridge

Found. v. Buttigieg, 22 F.4th at 282–86.             The surviving challenge

pertained to the manner in which MDOT compared the costs of

replacement and rehabilitation in concluding that rehabilitation

would represent a cost of "extraordinary magnitude" under 23 C.F.R.

§ 774.17 (2024), so as to render rehabilitation not "prudent" under

section 4(f).    Id. at 284.      As explained in more detail in our

opinion   on    that    prior    appeal,      MDOT    concluded        that     the

rehabilitation alternative would cost over double the cost of

replacement, for a shorter service life.                  Id. at 279.         In so

concluding, MDOT did not rely on the differential that would result

from discounting future costs to present value -- although it

calculated that differential, roughly 53%, in a calculation known


                                      - 4 -
as life-cycle cost analysis.        Id. at 284–86.   Nor did the agency

explain why it did not rely on discounted costs, apart from

"rel[ying] on non-discounted future costs as the better basis upon

which to compare the alternatives," id. at 279, despite evidence

that the DOT and the FHWA's own guidelines identify discounting as

"the standard and preferred way to compare future costs," id. at

284–85 (citing, among others, Off. of Asset Mgmt., FHWA, Pub.

No. FHWA IF-02-047, Life-Cycle Cost Analysis Primer 9 (2002)).          We

therefore vacated the FHWA decision in part and remanded the case

"for the strictly limited purpose of allowing the agency to further

justify use of the service-life analysis and/or to decide whether

a 53% price differential represents a cost of an extraordinary

magnitude under 23 C.F.R. § 774.17."        Id. at 286.

            The district court then did as we ordered, remanding the

case to the FHWA with identical instructions.        On remand, the FHWA

also did as we ordered, training its attention on deciding whether

a   53%    price    differential     between   new    construction     and

rehabilitation represented a cost of an extraordinary magnitude.

The FHWA concluded that the 53% differential did constitute a cost

of an extraordinary magnitude.

            Rather than contesting that finding, plaintiffs sought

to reframe the inquiry by pointing to the fact that MDOT had

recently increased its own estimate of the cost of building a new

bridge    from   $13 million   to   $42 million.     That   increase   in


                                    - 5 -
construction costs, plaintiffs contended, eliminated -- indeed

reversed -- the 53% differential.                   And to parry any assumption

that the cost of rehabilitating the bridge had similarly escalated,

plaintiffs submitted calculations of engineer Robert Shulock, who

"updated" MDOT's 2016 cost estimate for rehabilitation in light of

inflation.     According to Shulock and plaintiffs, the updated cost

of   rehabilitation      using       life-cycle        cost     analysis      would    be

approximately $25 million, a                roughly    $18-million savings from

MDOT's updated estimate for reconstruction.

           In its final Section 4(f) Limited Scope Re-Evaluation

("Re-Evaluation"), the FHWA did not accept plaintiffs' invitation

to conduct its own calculation of the updated costs of each

alternative;     nor   did     it    recalculate       the    differential         between

rehabilitation and reconstruction.                  It did "acknowledge[]" that

its own cost estimates for replacing the Bridge had increased from

$13 million in 2019 to $42 million in 2022.                    But it pointed to our

mandate   that    remand     was      to    be     "strictly    limited       to   either

justifying its prior use of non-discounted costs, and/or deciding

whether   a    53%     price        differential       represented        a    cost    of

extraordinary     magnitude."              Moreover,    relying     on   an    internal

evaluation of Shulock's calculations, the agency stated that it

found Shulock's "updated" rehabilitation costs to be "flaw[ed]."

"Among other things," the agency opined that:




                                           - 6 -
•   Shulock's inflation rate of 23% was too low, as

    compared   to   steel     component   rates   of   66–90%

    revealed by producer price indices and a general

    increase in construction costs of approximately

    40%, all of which indicated that "the ratio of

    increased costs reflected in the recent work plan

    estimates for the replacement alternative would

    apply at least     equally to [the]      rehabilitation

    [a]lternative."

•   Shulock's estimate failed to include major items

    that were included in the replacement estimate,

    such as "local amenities, utility work, and full

    right-of-way costs."

•   Shulock underestimated the costs of "painting, site

    access/trestle,    removal    of   existing   slab,   and

    construction of the temporary bridge" that would be

    required to rehabilitate the Bridge.

•   Shulock overlooked the difference in "long-term

    maintenance costs [which is] what truly separate[s]

    the two alternatives."

•   Shulock relied on a bridge rehabilitation project

    in New Hampshire as evidence of costs but failed to

    account for the fact that its square footage was




                      - 7 -
                  one-third that of the Bridge and its scope was not

                  as extensive.

             The agency concluded that it was "not persuaded that the

effects of inflation and other cost considerations presented in

public comments materially change the conclusions reached in its

draft [section] 4(f) Re-Evaluation."             It did explain that "[i]n

addition to dollar values, there is added risk and uncertainty to

keeping a fracture critical bridge in service beyond its intended

service life, even if it is extensively rehabilitated."1                  This

additional risk is not "fully capture[d]" by cost estimates because

"there is no consistent way to continuously monitor for defects."

And "[i]f a fracture critical component were to fail, it could

cause    a   bridge   to   collapse."        Regular   inspections   would    be

necessary to reduce this risk, and those would be time-intensive

and highly disruptive.

                                        I.

             In February 2023, plaintiffs again sued in United States

district court, alleging that it was arbitrary and capricious under

the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) for the FHWA not to have

considered      the    updated    cost       information    in   MDOT's      own



     1  As we noted in Historic Bridge v. Buttigieg, "[a]
fracture-critical bridge has elements that lack 'redundancy,' such
that the failure of one of those elements 'may ultimately lead to
a catastrophic failure of the entire bridge.'" 22 F.4th at 278
n.1.


                                   - 8 -
possession -- and that if it had, it would have found that

rehabilitation is a prudent and feasible alternative.2       After

fielding plaintiffs' varied efforts at enjoining construction on

the project,3 the district court granted summary judgment for the



     2  In the district court, plaintiffs challenged the FHWA's
decision under both section 4(f) and the National Environmental
Protection Act (NEPA). On appeal, plaintiffs state in a footnote
that they "believe that the [a]gencies violated [NEPA] by ignoring
new information . . . . However, this appeal focuses primarily on
the violation of [s]ection 4(f)."    Because they do not argue a
NEPA claim on appeal aside from this cursory reference, any such
claim is waived for underdevelopment.       See United States v.
Zannino, 895 F.2d 1, 17 (1st Cir. 1990) (applying the "settled
appellate rule that issues adverted to in a perfunctory manner,
unaccompanied by some effort at developed argumentation, are
deemed waived"). As a result, we discuss only the section 4(f)
issue.
     3  In March 2023, MDOT awarded a nearly $50-million contract
to begin construction on the Bridge replacement. Nat'l Tr. for
Hist. Pres. v. Buttigieg, No. 2:23-cv-00080, 2024 WL 69855, at *4
(D. Me. Jan. 5, 2024).      In response, plaintiffs moved for a
preliminary injunction to prevent construction going forward.
After the district court denied their motion, plaintiffs appealed
to this court and sought an emergency motion for an injunction
pending an appeal. We denied plaintiffs' emergency motion for an
injunction pending appeal without prejudice for non-compliance
with Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 8(a), instructing that
plaintiffs should first seek an injunction pending appeal from the
district court.    In response to this court's order, plaintiffs
filed an emergency motion for an injunction pending appeal in the
district court. They also requested a temporary restraining order
to halt work on bridge reconstruction, and in the case of a denial,
a stay of construction activities pending appeal. The district
court denied both requests; plaintiffs then renewed their
emergency motion for an injunction pending appeal with us.       We
denied this last request by stating, "[o]ur strictly limited remand
did not provide the occasion for a new foray by the plaintiffs
and, in any event, the new foray now attempted does not look
especially promising, even were its pursuit otherwise appropriate
notwithstanding our strictly limited remand."


                              - 9 -
agencies.    Nat'l Tr. for Hist. Pres. v. Buttigieg, No. 2:23-cv-

00080, 2024 WL 69855, at *1–2 (D. Me. Jan. 5, 2024).                In relevant

part, the district court found that the FHWA "was required to use

[MDOT's] 2016 cost estimates because those estimates were before

the agency 'at the time of the agency action.'"           Id. at *9 (quoting

Dep't of Homeland Sec. v. Regents of the U. of Cal., 591 U.S. 1,

20–21 (2020)).      The district court also reasoned that the agency

"complied    with     [this   court's]      remand     instructions,"       which

specifically instructed the FHWA to either justify its use of

non-discounted      figures     or    consider    whether     a     53%     price

differential was an extraordinary cost.          Id.    Because the district

court    found   that   the   agencies      properly   used   the    2016   cost

estimates, it found it "unnecessary to consider [p]laintiffs'

arguments concerning whether the rehabilitation alternatives would

be a prudent and feasible alternative if 2022 cost estimates were

used."    Id. at *9 n.7.      Plaintiffs appealed.

                                      II.

            "Agency     determinations      under . . .    section 4(f)       are

reviewed under the [APA] and accordingly shall not be overturned

unless arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise

not in accordance with law."         Hist. Bridge Found. v. Buttigieg, 22

F.4th at 282 (cleaned up); see 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A).                Under this

standard, a reviewing court should "determine whether the agency

has examined the pertinent evidence [and] considered the relevant


                                     - 10 -
factors."    Airport Impact Relief, Inc. v. Wykle, 192 F.3d 197, 202

(1st Cir. 1999) (quoting Penobscot Air Servs., Ltd. v. FAA, 164

F.3d 713, 719 (1st Cir. 1999)).           "The agency must explain the

evidence which is available, and must offer a 'rational connection

between the facts found and the choice made.'" Motor Vehicle Mfrs.

Ass'n of U.S. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 52

(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371

U.S. 156, 168 (1962)). We review a district court's decision under

the APA de novo.       Hist. Bridge Found. v. Buttigieg, 22 F.4th at

282.

                                  III.

            On   appeal,   plaintiffs    do   not   contest   that   a   53%

differential is a cost of extraordinary magnitude.            Instead, as

they argued before the agency and in the district court, they

contend that the FHWA should not have so limited its inquiry on

remand.     Rather, say plaintiffs, the FHWA should have reassessed

the relative costs of the alternatives in view of a significant

increase in construction costs during the six years that had passed

since the record before the FHWA was first compiled.             And they

contend that     the   FHWA's decision to continue to assume that

rehabilitation would cost roughly 53% more than new construction

was arbitrary and capricious.

            As the district court concluded, our mandate in the prior

appeal provides the simple answer to this argument.            There, the


                                 - 11 -
issue before us reflected the agency's 2019 comparison of 2016

cost   estimates     of   the     principal      rehabilitation    and   new

construction alternatives.        Hist. Bridge Found. v. Buttigieg, 22

F.4th at 284.      Without discounting to present value, those costs

generated a roughly 103% price differential, id. at 279, 281, and

it was that differential that the agency found to be a cost of

extraordinary magnitude.        But discounting costs to present value

generated only a roughly 53% differential. Thus, we issued a clear

mandate:     The remand proceeding was to be "strictly limited" to

either justifying the decision not to use discounted costs or to

opining on whether that differential was a cost of extraordinary

magnitude. Id. at 286. Plaintiffs now resist this straightforward

reading by arguing that our mandate allowed the agency to decide

much more -- i.e., to "deal with the problem afresh."             See SEC v.

Chenery Corp. (Chenery II), 332 U.S. 194, 201 (1947).              But this

reading of our mandate makes no sense.             An order that a remand

proceeding    be   "strictly    limited"    to    deciding   an   explicitly

identified and narrow issue does not ordinarily grant license to

consider other issues "afresh."

           Nevertheless,    say    plaintiffs,     the   agency   inherently

retained the ability to reopen the proceeding to reconsider its

prior conclusions based on new evidence.          As plaintiffs point out,

the Supreme Court has noted the possibility that, upon remand for

further justification of its decision, an "agency can 'deal with


                                   - 12 -
the problem afresh' by taking new agency action."              Regents of the

U. of Cal., 591 U.S. at 20–21 (2020) (citing Chenery II, 332 U.S.

at 201).     Whether it can do so when the remand mandate is limited

as it is here, we need not decide.         Rather, we will assume without

deciding that the agency did have the discretion to reopen the

proceeding.

           Primed    with      that    assumption,      plaintiffs'    argument

proceeds in two alternative forms.              First, and principally, they

argue that the agency did in fact reopen the record to consider

new cost information by responding to Shulock's estimates, and

therefore was required to recalculate the differential between

reconstruction and rehabilitation.             Second, and much less clearly,

plaintiffs seem to suggest that, if the agency did not reopen the

proceeding     to   consider     updated       cost   information,    it   acted

arbitrarily and capriciously.          Because we reject both arguments,

we need not reach plaintiffs' contention that, if the agency had

recalculated the differential, it would have necessarily found

that rehabilitation was a prudent and feasible alternative.4


     4  Nor do we accept plaintiffs' invitation to "supplement[]
the record" with new cost information, tendered to support a claim
that the agency was "wrong" in deciding not to recalculate the
price differential in the Re-Evaluation. Plaintiffs support this
argument with cases considering information that arose after an
agency's decision. See, e.g., Valley Cmty. Pres. Comm'n v. Mineta,
373 F.3d 1078, 1089 & n.2 (10th Cir. 2004) (finding that it was
not an abuse of discretion for the district court to consider a
letter sent to the FHWA after its determination that a project
would not affect any section 4(f) sites); Am. Petroleum Inst. v.


                                      - 13 -
                                  A.

           Plaintiffs   argue that, by considering and rebutting

Shulock's cost estimates, the FHWA reopened the record -- in other

words, it took into account new cost information that was not in

the record at the time of our remand.         See Pub. Emps. for Env't

Resp. v. Hopper, 827 F.3d 1077, 1089–90 (D.C. Cir. 2016) (finding

that the Fish and Wildlife Service reopened the record by choosing

to rely on new, post-remand analysis proffered by its in-house

economist).   And, plaintiffs say, because the agency considered

new costs, it was required to take the next step and recalculate

the differential.    See id. at 1090 (holding that it was arbitrary

and capricious for the Fish and Wildlife Service to "disregard"

new,   post-remand   data   submitted   by   plaintiffs   where   it   had

otherwise reopened the record).



EPA, 540 F.2d 1023, 1034 (10th Cir. 1976) (upholding an EPA
regulation based on the record before the EPA at the time it took
action and finding that "data obtained after promulgation"
strengthened that conclusion by showing "the validity of the EPA
actions"); Amoco Oil Co. v. EPA, 501 F.2d 722, 729 n.10 (D.C. Cir.
1974) (while reviewing an EPA regulation, supplementing the record
with post-promulgation testimony before a congressional committee
because the testimony "b[ore] directly upon the plausibility of
certain   predictions   made  by   the  [EPA]   Administrator   in
promulgating the Regulations"). Here, MDOT awarded a construction
contract for $50 million after the Re-Evaluation. See Nat'l Tr.,
2024 WL 69855, at *4. But at the time of the Re-Evaluation, MDOT
had already increased its estimate for the project to upwards of
$48 million. Thus, supplementing the record with the price of the
construction contract would not significantly alter the analysis,
much less show that the agency's section 4(f) determination was
"wrong."


                                - 14 -
            We disagree.        As plaintiffs point out on reply, the

agency did engage an in-house expert to review Shulock's estimates.

But   we   view    that    engagement     with       Shulock's      estimates         as   a

belt-and-suspenders        explanation         for   why    the     agency      was    not

reopening    the    proceeding       to   take       into    account      new    costs.

Plaintiffs' entire rationale for reopening was predicated on a

contention     that       the   rehabilitation         costs        had   not     risen

commensurately with new construction costs.                   That contention, in

turn, rested on Shulock's submission.                  So by explaining why it

found that submission to be seriously flawed, the FHWA effectively

explained    why   plaintiffs       had   not    shown      cause    to   reopen       the

proceeding to consider new costs even were it an option to do so.

Hence, the premise of plaintiffs' principal argument -- that the

agency reopened the record to consider new cost information -- is

simply not correct.

                                          B.

            Largely latent in plaintiffs' briefs is an alternative

argument that the agency acted arbitrarily and capriciously by

failing to reopen the record to consider updated cost information.

We disagree.      The fact that, in general, the costs of construction

rose between 2016 and 2022 is hardly surprising.                      So MDOT's new

2022 construction estimate provided no cause for questioning its

own    comparison         between     construction           and      rehabilitation

alternatives unless one thought that the costs of rehabilitating


                                      - 15 -
the bridge did not also rise commensurately.                Presumably for this

reason, plaintiffs proffered Shulock's cost estimate to show that

there was cause to expect significantly different increases in the

relative costs.       The FHWA, however, was unimpressed with that

submission.      And it explained why.            Not only did Shulock omit

certain construction, right-of-way, and maintenance costs from his

rehabilitation estimate, but he also used an apparently very low

inflation rate and relied on lower out-of-state bid prices in

calculating his estimate.           These perceived flaws, among others,

are like the thirteenth chime of the clock -- they not only seemed

wrong, but they also cast doubt on all of Shulock's reasoning that

preceded them.

              Plaintiffs'   counsel       seeks    to   parry      this    line   of

reasoning by attempting to quantify the FHWA's stated criticisms

of Shulock's analysis.       But much of this attempted quantification

was not in the record at the time of the Re-Evaluation, and thus

is not appropriate for our review.            See Chenery II, 332 U.S. at

196   ("[A]    reviewing    court . . .     must    judge    the    propriety     of

[agency] action solely by the grounds invoked by the agency.").

Moreover, counsel's attempts do not address all of the agency's

concerns -- notably, counsel's attempts do not seem to use an

inflation     rate   that   moots   the    agency's     breakdown     of    greater

inflation rates for specific components, nor do they meet the

thrust of the agency's observation that a key difference between


                                     - 16 -
rehabilitation and reconstruction was the cost and challenge of

maintenance.      As a result, we find that the record supports the

agency in its rejection of Shulock's estimates as compelling

reasons to expand the scope of the remand proceeding.

            In sum, the FHWA was acting in response to a "strictly

limited" instruction from this court.                    Hist. Bridge Found. v.

Buttigieg, 22 F.4th at 286.                 By deciding whether a 53% price

differential was a cost of extraordinary magnitude, the agency did

precisely    what    we   told   it    to    do    --   plaintiffs    hardly   argue

otherwise.     And on this record we cannot say that its failure to

recalculate       the     differential           between     rehabilitation      and

reconstruction using updated cost information was arbitrary and

capricious.

            Our     disposition       of    this    appeal    finds    support    in

contemplating the ramifications of a contrary holding. Many months

and years can pass between the end of an agency proceeding and the

end of judicial challenges to such a proceeding.                      Furthermore,

multi-issue appeals raising a slew of challenges are not unusual.

Were we to adopt plaintiffs' view that agencies on remand can be

compelled, on a record like this one, to reopen their proceedings

and "update" their assessments, finality and repose would diminish

as proceedings might never end.

                                           IV.

            For the foregoing reasons, we affirm.


                                       - 17 -