United States Court of Appeals
                     For the First Circuit


No. 23-1657

                   NORTHWESTERN SELECTA, INC.,

                      Plaintiff, Appellee,

                               v.

RAMÓN GONZÁLEZ-BEIRÓ, Secretary of the Puerto Rico Department of
Agriculture; ALEX MUÑIZ-LASALLE, Deputy Secretary of the Puerto
                 Rico Department of Agriculture

                     Defendants, Appellants.


          APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO

       [Hon. Raúl M. Arias-Marxuach, U.S. District Judge]


                             Before

                   Gelpí, Lipez, and Rikelman,
                         Circuit Judges.


    Edward W. Hill Tollinche for appellants.

     María D. Bertólez Elvira, with whom Néstor M. Méndez Gómez,
María Elena Martínez Casado, and Pietrantoni Méndez & Álvarez LLC
were on brief, for appellee.


                         July 17, 2025
          LIPEZ, Circuit Judge.           The Poultry Products Inspection

Act ("PPIA"), 21 U.S.C. §§ 451-473, provides for the inspection of

poultry and poultry products that move through or substantially

affect   interstate   or   foreign        commerce   and   regulates   their

processing and distribution.    Plaintiff Northwestern Selecta, Inc.

("NWS"), a Puerto Rico importer of poultry products, argues that

the PPIA expressly preempts a regulatory provision promulgated by

the Puerto Rico Department of Agriculture ("PRDA") -- Article

XII(B) of Market Regulation No. 8 -- that requires a PRDA inspector

to be present when a shipping container transporting poultry meat

is opened and unloaded.       The district court agreed with NWS,

determining that Article XII(B)'s            inspector requirement falls

within the scope of the PPIA's preemption clause and is not

exempted by its savings clause.           The court therefore granted NWS

declaratory relief and permanently enjoined the enforcement of

Article XII(B) against it. After careful consideration, we affirm.

                                     I.

A. The PPIA

          Enacted in 1957, the PPIA is a federal law that protects

consumers by ensuring that the "poultry products distributed to

them are wholesome, not adulterated, and properly marked, labeled,

and packaged."   21 U.S.C. § 451. To that end, the PPIA "provide[s]

for the inspection of poultry and poultry products and otherwise

regulate[s] the[ir] processing and distribution."               Id. § 452.
                                - 2 -
Specifically, among other things, the PPIA authorizes the ante and

postmortem       inspection     of    poultry        in   designated        "official

establishments," id. § 455; mandates that "sanitary practices"

shall apply to such establishments, see id. § 456; specifies

labeling    requirements       for    poultry     products,        see    id.    § 457;

prohibits the sale, transportation, or receipt of adulterated,

misbranded,      or   uninspected     poultry     products,        id.    § 458;      and

outlines the notification obligations of an official establishment

"that believes, or has reason to believe, that an adulterated or

misbranded poultry or poultry product received by or originating

from the establishment has entered into commerce," id. § 459.                          In

addition, the Food Safety Inspection Service ("FSIS") has been

delegated     the     authority      to     promulgate       further      rules       and

regulations      as   necessary      to    implement      the    PPIA.          See   id.

§ 463(a)-(b); 9 C.F.R. § 300.2(a), (b)(2).                       Pursuant to that

authority,    the     FSIS   has   promulgated       hundreds      of    implementing

regulations.      See 9 C.F.R. §§ 381.1-381.524.

            Of    primary     relevance      here,     the      PPIA    contains      the

following preemption provision, consisting of a preemption clause

and a savings clause:

                 Requirements within the scope of this
            chapter with respect to premises, facilities
            and operations of any official establishment
            which are in addition to, or different than
            those made under this chapter may not be
            imposed by any State or Territory or the
            District of Columbia . . . but any State or
                                          - 3 -
                  Territory or the District of Columbia may,
                  consistent with the requirements under this
                  chapter[,] exercise concurrent jurisdiction
                  with the Secretary over articles required to
                  be inspected under this chapter for the
                  purpose of preventing the distribution for
                  human food purposes of any such articles which
                  are adulterated or misbranded and are outside
                  of such an establishment . . . .

21 U.S.C. § 467e.

B. Background1

                  NWS is a San Juan-based company that brings fresh and

frozen poultry products into Puerto Rico from the continental

United States as well as from abroad. The domestically transported

poultry products, which are the focus of this appeal, are shipped

by sea in large cargo containers and enter Puerto Rico via the

Port of San Juan.          All poultry products that NWS brings to Puerto

Rico       from    the   mainland   are    inspected     by    the   United   States

Department of Agriculture ("USDA") prior to transport and are given

an "official mark" to that effect.

                  Upon arrival in Puerto Rico, the shipping containers are

offloaded         onto   the   Port's   docks     to   await    clearance     by   the

appropriate authorities, including the PRDA.                   NWS provides copies



       We draw the background facts from the parties' joint
       1

stipulations submitted to the district court. Accordingly, these
facts are "binding and conclusive," and "the parties will not be
permitted . . . to suggest, on appeal, that the facts were other
than as stipulated." Christian Legal Soc'y Chapter of the Univ.
of Cal., Hastings Coll. of the L. v. Martinez, 561 U.S. 661, 677
(2010) (quoting 83 C.J.S. Stipulations § 93 (2000)).
                                          - 4 -
of the shipments' bills of lading to inform the PRDA of the content

of the containers that have arrived in the Port, although the bills

of lading do not apprise the PRDA of the content's condition upon

arrival.     Once the containers are cleared, a contractor hired by

NWS   transports      them      from    the    Port    directly     to   NWS's   nearby

facility.      The containers are then opened and unloaded at the

facility.

             In June 2016, the PRDA promulgated Market Regulation

No. 8, titled, "To Govern the Quality and the Marketing of Poultry

Meat in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico."2                    The stated purpose of

Regulation No. 8 is to prevent "illegal practices" and "protect

the integrity in the quality and health of the local and imported

products     that   are     marketed      in    Puerto    Rico."         To   that   end,

Regulation    No.     8   outlines      various       requirements       regarding    the

transportation, storage, inspection, packaging, and labeling of

poultry products brought into Puerto Rico.                     The regulation also

empowers the PRDA to detain any lot of poultry meat that does not

meet the requirements set forth in the regulation, impose a fine

on    the   importer      for    each    violation       of   the   regulation,       and

eventually,     for       repeated      violations,       revoke     the      importer's

license. As pertinent to this appeal, Article XII(B) of Regulation




       Market Regulation No. 8 is registered with the Puerto Rico
       2

Department of State as Regulation No. 8764.
                                         - 5 -
No. 8 provides that "[a]n official of the [PRDA] must be present

at the time of opening and unloading the container" used to bring

poultry products into Puerto Rico.

           For   about    five    years   after   Regulation    No.   8   was

promulgated, the PRDA did not enforce or seek to enforce Article

XII(B) against NWS.      Then, in June 2021, the PRDA issued several

detention orders against NWS, impounding over 200,000 pounds of

fresh poultry products transported by NWS from the continental

United States.   The corresponding violation notices explained that

the orders were issued because a PRDA inspector was not physically

present   when   the   shipping    containers     used   to   transport   the

impounded products were "opened and unloaded at the NWS facilities"

in violation of Article XII(B).           Over the following months, the

PRDA issued violation notices to NWS with respect to thirty-five

shipping containers that were opened and unloaded outside the

presence of a PRDA inspector and asserted the right to impose on

NWS approximately $263,000 in fines.

C. District Court Proceedings

           Following     an   unsuccessful    attempt    to   challenge   the

violation notices      administratively      pursuant to the     procedures

outlined in Regulation No. 8, NWS filed a verified complaint in

federal court, asserting, among other things, that Article XII(B),

as well as another provision of Regulation No. 8 pertaining to

labeling -- Article XIV(A)(6) -- were expressly preempted by the
                                    - 6 -
PPIA and the regulations promulgated thereunder, and requesting

declaratory and injunctive relief.                After the PRDA submitted its

answer to the complaint, NWS filed a memorandum in support of its

request for injunctive relief and, a few months later, followed up

with an emergency motion for a preliminary injunction barring the

enforcement of Article XIV(A)(6) (the labeling provision) against

it.    The district court granted that emergency motion.

               Shortly thereafter, NWS filed another emergency motion

to    extend    the     preliminary      injunction      to    Article    XII(B)    (the

inspection          provision),    asserting      that    the     PRDA's      continued

enforcement of that provision was disrupting NWS's orderly and

timely operations.           The district court granted NWS's motion,

declaring that the PPIA expressly preempts Article XII(B) and

permanently enjoining its enforcement against NWS.3

               In     concluding       that   Article         XII(B)    is    expressly

preempted, the district court held that the Commonwealth provision

"necessarily relates to NWS'[s] operations, of which inspection is

an integral part."         Nw. Selecta, Inc. v. Sec'y of Dep't of Agric.

of P.R., Civ. No. 22-01092, 2023 WL 4230446, at *8 (D.P.R. June

28,    2023).         Relying     on   the    ordinary        meaning    of   the   term

"operations," the district court credited NWS's assertion "that



       The district court also granted declaratory and permanent
       3

injunctive relief on NWS's challenge to Article XIV(A)(6). The
PRDA did not appeal that ruling.
                                          - 7 -
compliance with [Article XII(B)] affects distribution operations

by   causing   delays    and   decreasing      the   shelf-life    of   imports,

particularly when the PRDA inspector is untimely or fails to arrive

completely" -- a likelihood that "is not speculative," given that

the PRDA has explicitly "recogniz[ed] the lack of sufficient

inspectors, and thus order[ed] aleatory inspections of imported

products."     Id. at *8 & n.3.          The court also noted that other

district courts have interpreted the PPIA's preemption clause

expansively, finding that even "more remote regulations affect

operations."    Id. (citing Johnson v. Tyson Foods, Inc., No. 21-

cv-01161,    2021   WL   5107723,   at    *6    (W.D.   Tenn.    Nov.   3,   2021)

(holding, in denying the plaintiff's motion to remand, that the

defendant raised a colorable federal defense because its COVID-19

"vaccination    policy    relates   to    its    premises,      facilities,    and

operations by ensuring that its employees are protected from

COVID-19 infection")).         Finally, the district court determined

that the PPIA's savings clause does not exempt Article XII(B) from

preemption because the Commonwealth provision does not apply to

items located "outside of" NWS's facility.              Id.

            The sole issue on appeal is whether the PPIA expressly

preempts Article XII(B).       The PRDA maintains that the Commonwealth

provision is not preempted, arguing that, in holding otherwise,

the district court embraced too broad an understanding of the term

"operations" in the PPIA's preemption clause and misapplied the
                                    - 8 -
PPIA's savings clause.        We review the district court's preemption

determination -- a question of law -- de novo.                   See Medicaid &

Medicare    Advantage    Prods.    Ass'n     of   P.R.,   Inc.    v.    Emanuelli

Hernández, 58 F.4th 5, 11 (1st Cir. 2023).

                                       II.

            The Supremacy Clause of the United States Constitution

makes federal law "the supreme Law of the Land," U.S. Const. art.

VI, cl. 2, meaning "that Congress 'has the power to [preempt] state

law,'" Medicaid & Medicare Advantage, 58 F.4th at 10 (quoting Me.

Forest Prods. Council v. Cormier, 51 F.4th 1, 6 (1st Cir. 2022)).

"The test for federal preemption of a Puerto Rico law is the same

as the test under the Supremacy Clause for preemption of the law

of   a   state."   Id.   at    10-11    (citing    P.R.   Dep't    of    Consumer

Affs. v. Isla Petroleum Corp., 485 U.S. 495, 499 (1988)).

            Federal preemption of a state or commonwealth law "may

be either express or implied."           Bower v. Egyptair Airlines Co.,

731 F.3d 85, 92 (1st Cir. 2013).             When a federal statute has an

express preemption clause, "we do not invoke any presumption

against [preemption]."        Puerto Rico v. Franklin Cal. Tax-Free Tr.,

579 U.S. 115, 125 (2016); see Medicaid & Medicare Advantage, 58

F.4th at 11-12 ("[T]he Supreme Court's broad language in Franklin

forecloses us from applying the presumption against preemption in

interpreting the [federal statute's] express preemption clause.").

Instead, we use the usual tools of statutory interpretation,
                                    - 9 -
"focus[ing] on the plain wording of the clause, which necessarily

contains the best evidence of Congress'[s] preemptive intent."

Chamber of Com. of U.S. v. Whiting, 563 U.S. 582, 594 (2011)

(quoting   CSX   Transp.,    Inc.    v.   Easterwood, 507   U.S.   658,   664

(1993)); see also Franklin, 579 U.S. at 125 (explaining that

resolving the scope of a preemption "provision begins 'with the

language of the statute itself'" (quoting United States v. Ron

Pair Enters., Inc., 489 U.S. 235, 241 (1989))).                After all,

Congress's "intent 'is the ultimate touchstone' of an express

preemption analysis."       Medicaid & Medicare Advantage, 58 F.4th at

11 (quoting First Med. Health Plan, Inc. v. Vega-Ramos, 479 F.3d

46, 51 (1st Cir. 2007)).            We also consider, secondarily, the

preemption clause's statutory context and the statute's overall

purpose.   See Coventry Health Care of Mo., Inc. v. Nevils, 581

U.S. 87, 96 (2017) (noting, after considering the preemption

clause's plain language, that "[t]he statutory context and purpose

reinforce [the Court's] conclusion").

A. The Preemption Clause

           The first question before us is whether the PPIA's

preemption clause -- i.e., the portion of the preemption provision

that precedes the savings clause -- applies to Article XII(B).

That clause consists of three distinct components.             It provides

for preemption when a state or commonwealth law or regulation

imposes requirements (1) "with respect to premises, facilities and
                                    - 10 -
operations"; (2) "of any official establishment"; that (3) "are in

addition to, or different than those" established by the PPIA or

its enabling regulations. 21 U.S.C. § 467e. The parties stipulate

that the second element is satisfied here: NWS's facility has been

deemed an "official establishment" by the Secretary of the USDA.

They also stipulate that the PPIA does not require an inspector to

be present when shipping containers are opened and unloaded.

Because the PRDA does not explain, nor do we otherwise see, how a

requirement that is absent from the PPIA is not "in addition to,

or different than" the PPIA's requirements, we construe this

stipulation    as    an     acknowledgment     that    the   third    element   is

satisfied    as     well.       Accordingly,      to   determine     whether    the

preemption     clause       applies    to      Article     XII(B)'s    inspector

requirement, we need to consider only whether that requirement is

"with respect to premises, facilities and operations."                  Id.

            NWS argues, as the district court found, that Article

XII(B)   functions      "with    respect    to"    NWS's     "operations."       We

therefore begin by discerning the meaning of those terms.                 Because

the PPIA does not define them, we look to the terms' ordinary

meanings.     See Sandifer v. U.S. Steel Corp., 571 U.S. 220, 227

(2014) ("It is a 'fundamental canon of statutory construction'

that, 'unless otherwise defined, words will be interpreted as

taking their ordinary, contemporary, common meaning.'" (quoting

Perrin v. United States, 444 U.S. 37, 42 (1979))).
                                      - 11 -
              When the PPIA was enacted in 1957, "operations" was

commonly understood to mean "the whole process of planning for and

operating a business or other organized unit" or, relatedly, "a

phase of a business or of business activity."                   Webster's New

International Dictionary of the English Language 1581 (3d ed.

1961); see also Operation, Webster's New International Dictionary

of the English Language 1707 (2d ed. 1950) ("Act of operating, or

putting into or maintaining in, action; as, the operation of a

machine, railroad, etc.").        A modern dictionary similarly defines

"operations" as "the activities involved in a company producing

goods or delivering services."             Cambridge English Dictionary,

https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/operation

[https://perma.cc/L3M9-B5RJ].            The term   "with respect to"       (or

"respecting") is now, and was at the time of the PPIA's enactment,

understood to mean "regarding" or "concerning."            See Lamar, Archer

&   Cofrin,    LLP v. Appling,     584    U.S.   709,   716    (2018)   (citing

Respecting, Random House Dictionary of the English Language 1221

(1st ed. 1966));                  Respecting,                  Dictionary.com,

https://www.dictionary.com/browse/respecting

[https://perma.cc/Q8Y6-CU66] ("regarding; concerning"); see also In

Respect       of     Something,     Cambridge        English       Dictionary,

https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/in-

respect-of      [https://perma.cc/H63W-5HMQ]        ("in      connection   with

something").       The definitions of these terms, separately and when
                                   - 12 -
considered together, connote breadth.        See, e.g., Lamar, Archer &

Cofrin, LLP, 584 U.S. at 717 ("Use of the word 'respecting' in a

legal context generally has a broadening effect, ensuring that the

scope of a provision covers not only its subject but also matters

relating to that subject."); Nat'l Meat Ass'n v. Harris, 565 U.S.

452, 458-59 (2012) (observing that a preemption clause virtually

identical to the PPIA's "sweeps widely").

              The broad sweep of the language as understood in its

ordinary sense suggests that any requirement that impacts NWS's

operations would be within the scope of the preemption clause, and

it appears beyond debate that Article XII(B)'s requirement would

have such impact.      The PRDA contends, however, that we should not

base our preemption determination on the ordinary meaning of the

term       "operations."     Specifically,    the   PRDA   says   that,

notwithstanding the term's plain, common meaning, the statutory

context as well as the PPIA's broader regulatory scheme make clear

that Congress intended for "operations" as used in the PPIA's

preemption clause to encompass only slaughtering and processing

activities.4     As support, the PRDA points to the PPIA's definition



       The PRDA interchangeably frames this argument as regarding
       4

the meaning of "operations" and as regarding the scope of the PPIA.
However, "[w]e see no real difference between saying that [Article
XII(B)] does not implicate 'operations'" within the meaning of the
PPIA "and saying that it does not fall within the scope of the
[PPIA]. Accordingly, our answer to both forms of the argument is
the same." Nat'l Meat Ass'n, 565 U.S. at 465 n.8.
                                 - 13 -
of an "official establishment," which is an establishment "at which

inspection of the slaughter of poultry, or the processing of

poultry products, is maintained" under the authority of the PPIA.

21 U.S.C. § 453(p); see also 9 C.F.R. § 381.1 (providing same

definition).    That definition, plus the references to slaughtering

and processing in 21 U.S.C. § 456 and select regulatory provisions,

the PRDA asserts, show that the PPIA "does not regulate matters

. . . that do not implicate the slaughter or processing [of]

poultry or poultry products."      Unavoidably then, says the PRDA, a

Commonwealth regulation that does not pertain to slaughtering or

processing is not preempted.5

          The    PRDA's    contention   that   the   PPIA   governs   only

"operations" relating to poultry slaughtering and processing is

plainly unavailing.       Most obviously, the statute's stated purpose

encompasses matters beyond slaughtering and processing, such as

regulating the "distribution of" poultry and poultry products, 21

U.S.C. § 452, and "assuring that poultry products distributed to

[consumers] are wholesome, not adulterated, and properly marked,

labeled, and packaged," id. § 451.         Moreover, as described above,



     5  The PPIA defines "[p]rocessed" as "slaughtered, canned,
salted,   stuffed,  rendered,   boned,  cut  up,   or   otherwise
manufactured or processed." 21 U.S.C. § 453(w); see also 9 C.F.R.
§ 381.1 (similar). "Slaughter" is defined as "the act of killing
poultry for human food."   9 C.F.R. § 381.1.   The parties agree
that NWS does not engage in the slaughtering or processing of
poultry meat within the meaning of the PPIA.
                                  - 14 -
and as NWS emphasizes, the statute's provisions and implementing

regulations     cover   an    array   of    activities     not   pertaining    to

slaughtering and processing, from labeling and recordkeeping to

sanitation and quality control.            See, e.g., id. §§ 456, 457, 460;

9 C.F.R. §§ 381.127, 381.145, 381.175.                 While the PPIA and its

implementing regulations focus heavily on the slaughtering and

processing of poultry, those matters are simply not the statute's

exclusive focus.        Thus, there is no basis for concluding that

Congress    intended     to   circumscribe       the    ordinary    meaning    of

"operations" in the PPIA's preemption clause in the way that the

PRDA suggests.6

            The PRDA also argues that Article XII(B) "has no direct

effect on the operations of" NWS, even if the term "operations" is

construed according to its plain meaning.              In so arguing, the PRDA

relies     on   the   Supreme    Court's       decision    in    National     Meat

Association, where the Court was tasked with deciding whether the

Federal Meat Inspection Act ("FMIA") -- which contains an express

preemption clause that is "substantially identical" to the PPIA's,

Grocery Mfrs. of Am., Inc. v. Gerace, 755 F.2d 993, 997 (2d Cir.



     6 To the extent that the PRDA argues that the PPIA does not
apply to NWS because NWS does not meet the statutory definition of
an "official establishment," that argument is a non-starter. As
noted above, the PRDA stipulated that NWS has been designated as
an "official establishment" for purposes of the PPIA. It cannot
undo that factual stipulation via its arguments on appeal. See
Christian Legal Soc'y, 561 U.S. at 677.
                                      - 15 -
1985) -- preempted a California statute that criminalized the

buying,    selling,     receiving,         butchering,    and   even   holding      of

nonambulatory pigs (i.e., pigs that cannot walk).                 See Nat'l Meat

Ass'n, 565 U.S. at 455, 458-59.               In holding that the California

statute was, indeed, preempted, the Court explained that the state

law     impermissibly     "compels         [slaughterhouses]      to    deal       with

nonambulatory pigs on their premises in ways that the [FMIA] and

regulations do not."          Id. at 460.     "And in so doing, the California

law runs smack into the FMIA's regulations."                 Id. at 467.

               The PRDA asserts that, unlike the state law at issue in

National Meat Association, Article XII(B) does not "reach[] into"

NWS's facilities or "affect[] its daily activities."                    Id.    While

the California statute "told the slaughterhouse what it could and

could    not    do   inside    of   its    premises,     facilities    and    in   its

operation," says the PRDA, Article XII(B) "does nothing to affect

the inner workings of" NWS.               Specifically, the PRDA asserts that

Article XII(B) "does not regulate the conditions under which [NWS]

can process, receive, handle, package or market meat."                  Any effect

Article XII(B) may have on NWS's operations is merely "incidental,"

the PRDA avers, in contrast to the California law's direct effect

on slaughterhouses.

               This argument, too, falls flat.              For one, the PRDA's

insistence that Congress did not intend for the PPIA to preempt

state or commonwealth laws or regulations that have an "incidental"
                                          - 16 -
effect on the operations of an official establishment is undermined

by the statute's text.          As we have explained, Congress's use of

the expansive phrase "with respect to" in the PPIA's preemption

clause signals congressional intent for the clause to cover all

"matters relating to" an official establishment's operations.                   See

Lamar, Archer & Cofrin, LLP, 584 U.S. at 717.               Given the preemption

clause's wide sweep, see Nat'l Meat Ass'n, 565 U.S. at 459, we see

no   basis   for    concluding    that       the   PPIA   could    not   preempt   a

Commonwealth        regulation        that     incidentally       affects     NWS's

operations.

             Moreover, even if we were to so conclude, Article XII(B)

does precisely what the PRDA says it does not.                 By forbidding NWS

from opening shipping containers outside the presence of a PRDA

inspector -- i.e., telling NWS what it can and cannot do -- Article

XII(B) expressly "regulate[s] the conditions under which" NWS can

"receive" and "handle" the poultry products it brings into Puerto

Rico.   Further, as described above, the district court credited

NWS's   assertion     that   compliance       with   Article      XII(B)    "affects

distribution       operations    by    causing     delays   and    decreasing   the

shelf-life of imports," thereby unavoidably impacting NWS's daily

activities.    Nw. Selecta, 2023 WL 4230446, at *8.               The PRDA points

to no facts suggesting that this finding was erroneous.                    Thus, far

from "incidental," Article XII(B), like the California law in


                                       - 17 -
National   Meat   Association,   directly   impacts   NWS's   ability   to

operate its business.

           Finally, the PRDA argues that the term "operations" in

the PPIA's preemption clause is limited by the accompanying terms

"premises" and "facilities" such that a state or commonwealth

regulation can be     preempted only      if it concerns an official

establishment's onsite operations -- i.e., those occurring at its

premises or facilities -- citing the Seventh Circuit's decision in

Chicago-Midwest Meat Association v. City of Evanston, 589 F.2d 278

(7th Cir. 1978).7   Article XII(B), the PRDA contends, does not have

the requisite onsite impact.      NWS responds that the PRDA did not

argue before the district court that the PPIA preempts only state

or commonwealth regulations that concern onsite operations and

thus has waived this argument.




     7 In Chicago-Midwest Meat Association, the plaintiffs argued
that a municipal ordinance permitting the inspection of meat
delivery vehicles was preempted by the Wholesome Meat Act, a 1967
amendment to the FMIA. Chi.-Midwest Meat Ass'n, 589 F.2d at 280.
Based on the preemption clause's language and the statute's
legislative history, the Seventh Circuit interpreted the phrase
"premises, facilities and operations" to mean that only
requirements concerning operations "on the premises of the
regulated establishments" could be preempted.     Id. at 283-84.
Because the ordinance at issue authorized the inspection of
delivery vehicles "while on their delivery routes" and thus "away
from" the regulated establishments, the court held that the
ordinance was not "with respect to premises, facilities and
operations" and therefore was not preempted. Id.
                                 - 18 -
               However, we need not delve into the waiver issue because

the PRDA's argument clearly fails as a factual matter.           Although

it now purports to argue otherwise, the PRDA stipulated in the

district court that NWS's shipping containers are "opened and

unloaded at the NWS facilities." (Emphasis added).           The PRDA may

not contradict its stipulations in the district court and contend

on appeal that Article XII(B)'s inspector requirement somehow

functions "away from" NWS's facility.         See Christian Legal Soc'y

Chapter of the Univ. of Cal., Hastings Coll. of the L. v. Martinez,

561 U.S. 661, 677 (2010).           Also, the various violation notices

that the PRDA issued explain that NWS violated Article XII(B)

because NWS's shipping containers were "opened and unloaded at the

facilities" without a PRDA inspector present. (Emphasis added.)

The     PRDA    likewise   cannot    disassociate   itself   from     these

representations on appeal.

               In sum, the PPIA's preemption clause broadly covers

state    and     commonwealth   regulations   "with   respect   to"    the

procedures and activities involved in the operation of an official

establishment.       Article XII(B)'s application to NWS falls within

that scope.      Accordingly, we hold that Article XII(B) is expressly

preempted by the PPIA's preemption clause.

B. The Savings Clause

               The second question before us is whether Article XII(B)

is exempted from preemption by the preemption provision's savings
                                    - 19 -
clause, which provides that any state or territory "may, consistent

with   the     requirements        under    [the   PPIA,]     exercise    concurrent

jurisdiction . . . over articles required to be inspected under"

the PPIA to "prevent[] the distribution for human food purposes of

any such articles which are adulterated or misbranded and are

outside of . . . an [official] establishment."                  21 U.S.C. § 467e.

Once again, our interpretation of this clause is grounded in its

plain language.          See Franklin, 579 U.S. at 125.

               The district court read the plain language of the savings

clause    as    limiting     the    Commonwealth's      exercise    of    concurrent

jurisdiction to the regulation of poultry "products [that] are

outside of official establishments." Nw. Selecta, 2023 WL 4230446,

at *8.    Because it determined that the poultry products that NWS

brings    into    Puerto     Rico    "are    necessarily      inside     an   official

establishment" -- NWS's facility -- when the products' containers

are    opened      and     unloaded,       the     district    court      held    that

Article XII(B), as applied to NWS, is not a proper exercise of

concurrent jurisdiction.            Id.

               We agree with the district court's interpretation of the

savings clause to the extent that the court read the clause as

permitting the Commonwealth to impose some requirements on poultry

products that are outside of an official establishment.                       21 U.S.C.

§ 467e.    Indeed, the PRDA does not challenge this reading, arguing

instead that the district court erred in concluding that Article
                                          - 20 -
XII(B), as applied to NWS, does not function outside of NWS's

facility -- that is, in concluding that the "container is inside

or part of [NWS's] official establishment" when it is opened and

unloaded.      The    PRDA    again     relies    on     Chicago-Midwest      Meat

Association,    asserting      that     the    delivery     truck    inspection

ordinance at issue there, which the Seventh Circuit determined was

not   preempted,     is    analogous     to    Article    XII(B)'s    inspector

requirement.    See 589 F.2d at 283.             Again, though, the PRDA's

argument    misses   the     mark   because,     as    explained     above,    the

stipulated facts distinguish this case from Chicago-Midwest Meat

Association.

            However, to the extent that the district court read the

savings clause as prohibiting the Commonwealth from exercising

concurrent jurisdiction inside of an official establishment under

any circumstances, we disagree. The savings clause simply provides

that "outside of . . . an [official] establishment" a state or

commonwealth may exercise concurrent jurisdiction to "prevent[]

the distribution for human food purposes of any" articles subject

to the PPIA's inspection requirements "which are adulterated or

misbranded." 21 U.S.C. § 467e. In other words, the savings clause

clarifies that a state or commonwealth retains its traditional

police powers over articles subject to federal inspection once

those articles have left an official establishment.                 Inside of an

official establishment, a state or commonwealth may exercise its
                                      - 21 -
authority so long as that exercise complies with the preemption

clause -- that is, so long as the state or commonwealth is not

imposing additional or different requirements than those contained

in the PPIA.     See Bates v. Dow Agrosciences LLC, 544 U.S. 431, 447

(2005) (concluding that a preemption provision barring state-law

requirements         "in    addition     to     or   different     from"      federal

requirements does not interfere with an "equivalent" and "fully

consistent"      state       requirement).           Because   Article       XII(B)'s

inspector      requirement        is     not     equivalent       to   the     PPIA's

requirements, as we have explained, Article XII(B) is not a

permissible exercise of the Commonwealth's authority.

              But,    consistent       with    the   preemption    provision,     the

Commonwealth would be free to "exact civil or criminal penalties

for . . . conduct that also violates the [PPIA]."                       Nat'l Meat

Ass'n, 565 U.S. at 467 n.10; see also Kuenzig v. Kraft Foods, Inc.,

No. 8:11-cv-838-T-24, 2011 WL 4031141, at *4 (M.D. Fla. Sept. 12,

2011) ("The states' concurrent jurisdiction has been interpreted

to mean that states can impose sanctions for violations of state

requirements that are equivalent to the FMIA and the PPIA's

requirements.").           So, for example, we see no reason why the PRDA

could   not    permissibly      promulgate       a   regulation    permitting     its

inspectors, inside of the official establishment, to take samples

of poultry products that NWS brings into Puerto Rico after the

containers transporting those products are opened because such an
                                        - 22 -
exercise of authority would be consistent with the PPIA.           See 9

C.F.R.   § 381.146   (permitting   inspectors   to   "take . . .    such

samples as are necessary of any poultry product . . . at any

official establishment to determine whether it complies with the

requirements of the regulations").8 Thus, while the PPIA "preempts

much state law," it certainly "leaves some room for the [s]tates

to regulate."   Nat'l Meat Ass'n, 565 U.S. at 467 n.10.

           Accordingly, we hold that the savings clause does not

exempt Article XII(B) from preemption.      We therefore affirm the

judgment of the district court.

           So ordered.




     8 At oral argument, counsel for NWS explained that the PRDA
does, in fact, regularly exercise its concurrent jurisdiction
inside of NWS's establishment by taking samples of the poultry
products that NWS brings into Puerto Rico and that NWS has no
objection to that conduct.
                               - 23 -