United States Court of Appeals
                       For the First Circuit


No. 22-1749

                         DAVID NÚÑEZ-PÉREZ,

                        Petitioner, Appellee,

                                 v.

ANA I. ESCOBAR-PABÓN, Secretary of the Puerto Rico Department of
   Corrections and Rehabilitation; HÉCTOR HERNÁNDEZ-MORALES,
              Warden; COMMONWEALTH OF PUERTO RICO,

                      Respondents, Appellants.


            APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                  FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO

            [Hon. William G. Young,* U.S. District Judge]


                               Before

                        Barron, Chief Judge,
               Montecalvo and Aframe, Circuit Judges.


     Mariola Abreu-Acevedo, Assistant Solicitor General, with whom
Fernando Figueroa-Santiago, Solicitor General of Puerto Rico, and
Omar Andino-Figueroa, Deputy Solicitor General of Puerto Rico,
were on brief, for appellants.
     Samuel P. Carrion, with whom Kevin E. Lerman, Research &
Writing Attorney, Franco L. Pérez-Redondo, Assistant Federal
Public Defender, and Rachel Brill, Federal Public Defender, were
on brief, for appellee.




     *   Of the District of Massachusetts, sitting by designation.
March 21, 2025
           BARRON, Chief Judge.        This appeal concerns a challenge

to a ruling by the United States District Court for the District

of Puerto Rico that granted a writ of habeas corpus under 18 U.S.C.

§ 2254 to David Núñez Pérez.1              Núñez's petition sought habeas

relief from his 2006 Puerto Rico law convictions for carjacking

and manslaughter.      The petition did so on the ground that, under

Puerto Rico v. Sánchez Valle, 579 U.S. 59 (2016), his prosecution

for those offenses and the resulting convictions violated the

Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment to the United States

Constitution.      See U.S. Const. amend. V.       The respondents contend

that we must reverse the ruling below because Núñez's petition was

not timely filed.      We affirm the ruling.       We do so, however, for

different reasons than those on which the District Court relied,

as we conclude that the respondents waived below the only ground

for deeming the petition untimely that they now assert on appeal.

                                      I.

           On July 24, 2001, Núñez was indicted in the District of

Puerto   Rico   on   one   federal   carjacking    count,   see    18    U.S.C.

§ 2119(3),   and     two   related   federal   firearms   counts,       see   id.

§ 924(c)(1)(A)(ii); id. § 922(g)(1); id. § 924(a)(2).             Many months

later, in February 2002, Núñez was also indicted in superior court




     1 We refer to the appellee as "Núñez" consistent with how he
refers to himself in his briefing to us.    See United States v.
Rosa-Borges, 101 F.4th 66, 68 n.1 (1st Cir. 2024).


                                     - 3 -
in Puerto Rico under Puerto Rico law on charges arising from the

same alleged incident that gave rise to the charges in his federal

indictment.     This new indictment charged Núñez under Puerto Rico

law   with    carjacking,      first       degree    murder,     and   two    weapons

possession counts.

             On May 2, 2002, Núñez pleaded guilty to the federal

carjacking charge and, soon thereafter, he was sentenced to ten

years' imprisonment for the resulting conviction.                      The federal

firearms charges were dismissed.                  Then, on November 14, 2003, a

jury in the superior court in Puerto Rico found Núñez guilty of

the Puerto Rico law carjacking and weapons charges, as well as the

lesser included Puerto Rico law charge of manslaughter.                         Núñez

received a 69-year prison sentence for his convictions for those

offenses, which was to be served consecutively to his ten-year

prison sentence for his related federal conviction.

             Núñez    appealed      his    Puerto     Rico   law   convictions     on

various grounds.          He also challenged the constitutionality of his

sentence on the ground that he was already serving a federal

sentence for the same conduct.             Treating this challenge as a claim

under the Double Jeopardy Clause, the Puerto Rico Court of Appeals

rejected Núñez's claim.            It held that because Puerto Rico and the

federal      government      are    separate        sovereigns,    "conduct      that

constitutes     a    crime    in    both    jurisdictions        may   be    punished

independently        by     both     entities[]        without     violating      the


                                          - 4 -
constitutional clause against double jeopardy or constituting

multiple punishments for the same conduct."              Núñez then filed a

petition for certiorari to the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico on

February 2, 2007, which was denied.

           Nearly a decade later, on June 9, 2016, the Supreme Court

of the United States decided Puerto Rico v. Sánchez Valle, 579

U.S. 59.   In that case, the Court held that the United States and

Puerto Rico are not separate sovereigns for the purpose of the

Double Jeopardy Clause, and thus that neither may "successively

prosecute a single defendant for the same criminal conduct."               Id.

at 62.

           One year and eleven days after the decision in Sánchez

Valle issued, Núñez filed a Rule 192.1 motion in Puerto Rico

court.2    The motion asserted that the rule announced in Sánchez

Valle barred Núñez's Puerto Rico law carjacking and manslaughter

convictions.

           The motion was denied on September 12, 2018.               Núñez's

petitions for certiorari to the Puerto Rico Court of Appeals and

the   Supreme   Court   of   Puerto   Rico      were   likewise   denied   on,

respectively,   December 18,    2018,     and    February 15,     2019.    The




      2 Rule 192.1 sets forth the procedures for seeking
post-conviction collateral relief in Puerto Rico court. See P.R.
Laws Ann. tit. 34A, App. II, § 192.1.


                                  - 5 -
Supreme Court of Puerto Rico also denied Núñez's two motions for

reconsideration.3

            On May 21, 2019, Núñez, acting pro se, filed a federal

habeas petition pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2254 in the United States

District Court for the District of Puerto Rico.4                His petition

contended    that       the   rule   announced   in   Sánchez    Valle   was

retroactively applicable to his Puerto Rico law carjacking and

manslaughter convictions and that he was therefore entitled to

relief from them under the Double Jeopardy Clause.            Counsel later

appeared    on    his    behalf   and,   on   October 23,   2020,   filed   a

supplemental motion in support of his petition.

            On February 23, 2021, Núñez asked the District Court to

order the respondents to answer his petition, which the District

Court did.       The respondents then filed a motion to dismiss the

petition on March 29, 2021.

            In the motion to dismiss, the respondents argued that

the petition was time-barred under the Antiterrorism and Effective

Death Penalty Act (AEDPA).            That measure provides that state

prisoners' federal habeas petitions under § 2254 are untimely if


     3 The record does not reflect the dates of the two denials of
Núñez's motions for reconsideration, but the District Court
accepted the respondents' representation that the second motion
was denied no later than May 17, 2019.
     4 Although Núñez's petition was not docketed until June 7,

2019, a pro se prisoner's § 2254 petition is consider filed on the
date on which it is placed in the mail. Morales-Rivera v. United
States, 184 F.3d 109, 109 (1st Cir. 1999) (per curiam).


                                     - 6 -
filed outside a one-year statute of limitations.                                28 U.S.C.

§ 2244(d)(1).

               In     general,     the     limitations          period        imposed     by

§ 2244(d)(1) runs from "the date                     on which the [state               court]

judgment became final."             Id. § 2244(d)(1)(A).               However, when a

petition seeks relief based on a federal constitutional right that

"has    been     newly     recognized      by    the      Supreme      Court     and    made

retroactively         applicable    to    cases      on     collateral       review,"     the

limitations period runs from "the date on which [that right]

was . . .       initially       recognized      by    the     Supreme    Court."         Id.

§ 2244(d)(1)(C).          Section 2244(d) also provides for separate dates

from    which       the   limitations     period       runs    if     there    existed    an

"impediment to filing [the petition] created by [unlawful] State

action" or the petition's claim depends on a "factual predicate"

that    could       not   previously     have    been     "discovered         through    the

exercise of due diligence."              Id. § 2244(d)(1)(B), (D).

               The respondents contended that § 2244(d)(1)(A) set forth

the    relevant       limitations      period    for      Núñez's      petition.        They

emphasized that because "the Supreme Court did not expressly

declare     [that]        its    ruling    in        Sánchez    Valle         would    apply

retroactively," that case "did not trigger the renewal of the

statute        of     limitations"         under        § 2244(d)(1)(C)           (quoting

Santana-Ríos v. United States, 235 F. Supp. 3d 386, 387-88 (D.P.R.

2017)).        Respondents       further     contended         that    the     alternative


                                          - 7 -
limitations periods supplied by § 2244(d)(1)(B) and (D) did not

apply because Núñez did not argue either that there had been a

relevant impediment to his filing or that his claim was based on

factual predicates that could not previously have been discovered

through the exercise of due diligence.

          Based on § 2244(d)(1)(A), the respondents argued that,

to have been timely filed, Núñez's petition would have to have

been filed no later than one year from the date on which his

convictions became final.    As a result, they contended that the

petition would have to have been filed within one year after

February 2, 2007, as that was when the Supreme Court of Puerto

Rico denied Núñez's petition for a writ of certiorari in his direct

appeal.    Accordingly,     the    respondents   contended   that   the

applicable limitations period for Núñez's petition expired on

February 2, 2008.   Because Núñez filed the petition more than a

decade later, in 2019, they contended based on § 2244(d)(1)(A)

that his petition was untimely.5


     5 The respondents also asserted that Núñez's petition should
be dismissed for failure to state a claim because "Sánchez Valle
did nothing to undercut or eliminate the privity requirement" for
double jeopardy claims, and that Núñez "failed to develop any
argument suggesting that this privity requirement was met" in his
case. In a later filing, the respondents also argued that because
the ruling in Sánchez Valle established a procedural rather than
a substantive rule, it is not retroactively applicable on
collateral review and cannot entitle Núñez to relief. The District
Court, in granting the petition, rejected both these contentions.
However, the respondents have not appealed either conclusion.
Therefore, we need not address these issues on appeal.


                                  - 8 -
           On June 3, 2021, the District Court issued an order that

directed the parties to submit supplemental briefing addressing

the statute of limitations issue.          In particular, the District

Court directed the parties to address whether the Supreme Court's

holding in Sánchez Valle "established a right that was (1) 'newly

recognized by the Supreme Court,' and (2) 'made retroactively

applicable to cases on collateral review' for purposes of [the]

statute of limitations analysis under 28 U.S.C. § 2244(d)(1)(C)."

           The parties made responsive filings.            Núñez asserted

that Sánchez Valle had indeed established a new right that was

retroactively applicable on collateral review.          The respondents,

for their part, "reiterate[d] that [Núñez's] habeas [petition] is

time-barred because it was filed multiple years after the statute

of limitations allotted by 28 U.S.C. § 2244(d)(1)(A) expired."

They further contended that, under existing precedent, Sánchez

Valle did not establish a new rule retroactively applicable on

collateral review.    The respondents also reiterated that neither

the   alternative   limitations   period    set    forth   by   28   U.S.C.

§ 2244(d)(1)(B) or the one set forth by § 2244(d)(1)(D) applied.

Thus, the respondents again contended that Núñez had "one [] year

from the time his conviction became final on February 2, 2007,

that is until February 2, 2008, to file a [§ 2254 petition],

pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2244(d)(1)(A)."           Accordingly, they once

again argued that his petition was untimely because, under the


                                  - 9 -
limitations period set by § 2244(d)(1)(A), it was filed more than

a decade too late.

          On November 4, 2021, the District Court held a hearing

on the respondents' motion to dismiss.    Both sides made arguments

at the hearing regarding the retroactivity of the Sánchez Valle

rule.   For the first time, the respondents asserted that Núñez's

petition was "[n]ot only . . . time-barred . . . taking [as] a

start date, the date that the petitioner's conviction and sentence

became final, but . . . also tak[ing] the date that the petitioner

filed [his] Rule 192.1 motion" and "calculat[ing] from the date

that the [Sánchez Valle] decision was published."    The respondents

did not elaborate further, however, about why the petition would

be untimely under that limitations period.

          Following the hearing, the District Court ordered the

respondents to answer the petition.      In the order, the District

Court directed the respondents -- "as to their obligations" -- to

Rule 5 of the Rules Governing 2254 Cases in the United States

District Courts.     Rule 5 provides, among other things, that the

answer to a § 2254 petition "must state whether any claim in the

petition is barred by . . . a statute of limitations."        Habeas

Rule 5(b).

          The respondents filed their answer on February 4, 2022.

In doing so, they responded to the contentions that Núñez had made

in his petition.     In his petition, Núñez had stated that he filed


                                - 10 -
a Rule 192.1 motion "[w]hen the Supreme Court . . . published

[Sánchez Valle]."    The respondents addressed that portion of

Núñez's petition in their answer by alleging that Núñez's Rule

192.1 motion was filed "on June 20[], 2017, 373 days after the

Supreme Court . . . decided [Sánchez Valle]."6    Respondents made

no further mention in their answer of the date on which the

Rule 192.1 motion was filed.   So, in the separate portion of the

answer addressing affirmative defenses, the respondents did not

assert as an affirmative defense that Núñez's petition would be

untimely if § 2244(d)(1)(C)    supplied the relevant limitations

period.   Rather, the respondents expressly reprised the argument

they had made in their motion to dismiss and in subsequent briefing

to the District Court.   In other words, they argued that Núñez's

§ 2254 petition was time-barred under 28 U.S.C. § 2244(d)(1)(A)

because, under that provision, the one-year statute of limitations

began to run on February 2, 2007, and the petition was filed over

a decade later.

          In making that argument, the respondents did recognize

that "[i]n the alternative," § 2244(d)(1)(C) allows the statute of

limitations to run from the date on which a constitutional right

is newly recognized by the Supreme Court and made retroactively


     6 Because Sánchez Valle was decided on June 9, 2016, Núñez's
petition was in fact filed 376 -- not 373 -- days after its
issuance, as the District Court subsequently recognized. Nothing
turns, however, on the difference between these two numbers.


                               - 11 -
applicable on collateral review. But they asserted in their answer

only       that,   because   Sánchez    Valle   is    not     such   a   rule,   the

limitations period set forth in § 2244(d)(1)(C) has no application

to the petition.       They did not assert at any point in their answer

that the petition would be untimely even if that limitations period

applied.

               Following     the   respondents'      filing    of    their   answer

asserting only the petition's untimeliness under § 2244(d)(1)(A),

the District Court, in a March 31, 2022 order, raised on its own

a   different      possibility.        This   possibility      was   that    Núñez's

petition was separately untimely under § 2244(d)(1)(C), insofar as

it set the applicable limitations period, because his Rule 192.1

motion -- which preceded the filing of his § 2254 petition -- was

filed eleven days after the one-year statute of limitations set by

§ 2244(d)(1)(C) had expired.7           The District Court noted in raising

this possibility that neither side in their prior filings had

"addressed th[is] threshold issue of whether the [§ 2244(d)(1)(C)




       Although the one-year statute of limitations governs the
       7

filing of a federal habeas petition, the limitations period is
tolled while a state petition for post-conviction or other
collateral review is pending. See 28 U.S.C. § 2244(d)(2). This
includes a Puerto Rico Rule 192.1 motion.      See Díaz-Castro v.
Matta, 568 F. Supp. 3d 144, 150 (D.P.R. 2021). However, because
the filing of a state court petition "does not reset the clock on
the limitations period," in order to toll the statute of
limitations, a state court petition must itself be filed within
the limitations period imposed by § 2244(d)(1). Trapp v. Spencer,
479 F.3d 53, 58 (1st Cir. 2007).


                                       - 12 -
limitations] period had expired before the Rule 192.1 motion was

even filed."

             The District Court ordered the parties to file a joint

memorandum addressing whether the petition was untimely even under

the limitations period set forth by § 2244(d)(1)(C).               The District

Court further inquired as to whether, presuming that any part of

§ 2244(d)(1) bars the petition, the respondents would nonetheless

waive the statute of limitations as a defense.

             In the joint memorandum, Núñez acknowledged that his

Rule 192.1 motion was filed eleven days after the statute of

limitations would otherwise have expired under § 2244(d)(1)(C).

Citing Holland v. Florida, 560 U.S. 631, 645 (2010), however, he

contended    that    he   was    entitled   to     equitable   tolling   of     the

limitations period.        He argued in that respect that he had been

"actively pursuing his constitutional rights of double jeopardy"

and   that   the    statute     of   limitations    "does   not   set   forth    an

inflexible rule requiring dismissal whenever the one-year clock

has run."

             The respondents asserted that because the limitations

period established by § 2244(d)(1)(C) expired before Núñez's Rule

192.1 motion was filed and he had not alleged that equitable

tolling applied, his petition was untimely and should be dismissed.

The respondents further indicated that they would not waive the

statute of limitations under any of § 2244(d)(1)'s provisions.


                                       - 13 -
            On    August 1,    2022,    the     District     Court    denied   the

respondents' motion to dismiss and granted the petition.                       The

District    Court   determined      that     § 2244(d)(1)(C)    set    forth   the

relevant date from which the statute of limitations ran, because

Sánchez Valle was a new rule of constitutional law that applied

retroactively.      The District Court then further determined that,

under Holland, Núñez was entitled to equitable tolling.                  It thus

ruled that Núñez's petition was timely under § 2244(d)(1)(C),

notwithstanding that his state-court motion was filed eleven days

after one year had passed from the issuance of the Supreme Court's

decision in Sánchez Valle.

            The District Court reasoned that, on the limited record

before      it,     Núñez     had      met     both    the     diligence       and

extraordinary-circumstances          prongs     of    the    equitable   tolling

standard.    The District Court also emphasized that equity requires

a "'case-by-case' approach," and that "[v]iewing the case as a

whole," and "in light of the stakes at issue," which "in practical

terms [amounted to] a life sentence," enforcing the statute of

limitations in the face of an eleven-day delay would be "so

disproportionate that equity would seem to mandate tolling."

            As to the merits of the petition, the District Court

concluded that Sánchez Valle announced a substantive rule that is

retroactively applicable; that the Puerto Rico courts had "failed

to apply the Supreme Court's federal retroactivity analysis" in


                                     - 14 -
rejecting Núñez's Rule 192.1 motion on that basis; and that their

decisions were therefore "contrary to, or involved an unreasonable

application of, clearly established [f]ederal law" (quoting 28

U.S.C. § 2254(d)(1)).      Because the respondents had admitted that

Núñez's Puerto Rico carjacking and manslaughter convictions were

identical to his federal carjacking conviction, the District Court

held that the two later-in-time Puerto Rico prosecutions were

barred by the Double Jeopardy Clause.           Thus, the District Court

concluded, Núñez was entitled to his requested habeas relief.8

            In August 2022, the respondents sought reconsideration,

which the District Court denied.             On September 27, 2022, the

respondents filed a Notice of Appeal.          On appeal, the respondents

challenge   only   the   District    Court's   conclusion,   on   equitable

tolling grounds, that the petition was timely despite being filed

after the expiration of the one-year statute of limitations set

forth by 28 U.S.C. § 2244(d)(1)(C).




     8 Although the District Court initially stayed execution of
the writ, in June 2023, Núñez filed an emergency motion for
release, in which he explained that by that point he had overserved
the lawful portion of his Puerto Rico sentences by several months,
and that he had serious medical needs that were not being treated.
The respondents opposed. At a July 10, 2023 hearing, the District
Court ordered Núñez's release, explaining that at the time of the
August 2022 order, the court had been under the misimpression that
Núñez had several years left to serve on his still-lawful Puerto
Rico weapons convictions. Núñez has been out of prison since.


                                    - 15 -
                                     II.

            Although Núñez defends the District Court's equitable

tolling decision, he also argues that, regardless of the merits of

that analysis, we should not reverse the District Court on the

basis that his petition was untimely under § 2244(d)(1)(C).             That

is so, Núñez contends, because the respondents waived (rather than

merely forfeited) any argument that his petition was untimely under

that provision "by not presenting or developing [that defense]

below."9    To support that contention, Núñez argues that, in the

District        Court,   the   respondents       "demonstrated    sustained

disinterest in asserting an 11-day-based affirmative defense"

under § 2244(d)(1)(C), opting instead to advance, as their sole

statute    of    limitations   defense,    "an   all-or-nothing[]   11-year

§ 2244(d)(1)(A)-dependent claim."            Núñez points to, among other

things, the respondents' failure to assert a timeliness defense

under § 2244(d)(1)(C) in either their motion to dismiss or their

answer.    He also points to the fact that § 2244(d)(1)(A) was the

"sole     affirmative    defense"    regarding     timeliness    that   they


     9 Because the District Court, after concluding that Núñez's
petition was filed outside the limitations period set by
§ 2244(d)(1)(C), went on to hold that the petition was nonetheless
timely based on principles of equitable tolling, it is unsurprising
that on appeal Núñez defends the merits of that equitable tolling
ruling. He nonetheless also contends that the respondents' waiver
of their § 2244(d)(1)(C) defense below provides an alternative
basis for rejecting their appeal.     Because we agree with Núñez
that the respondents' § 2244(d)(1)(C) defense was waived, we need
not reach the District Court's equitable tolling analysis.


                                    - 16 -
developed in their answer. He adds that the respondents repeatedly

represented that § 2244(d)(1)(C) was not triggered by Sánchez

Valle and thus that, as Núñez puts it, "the case rose or fell

depending strictly on [Sánchez Valle's] retroactivity."

              Of   course,       Núñez     does     recognize      that    after    the

respondents filed their answer, the District Court, of its own

volition, raised the issue of whether the petition was untimely

even under the more favorable limitations period set forth in

§ 2244(d)(1)(C).           Núñez    notes,       however,   that    even    after   the

District      Court   raised       sua     sponte    the    petition's       potential

untimeliness under § 2244(d)(1)(C), the respondents did not object

to the District Court's statement that they had not previously

addressed the issue, assert any justification for the failure to

raise that defense in their answer, claim that the failure was the

result of "mistake or inadvertence," or seek leave to amend.

Noting that the respondents also made no effort in their opening

brief to defend their failure to raise § 2244(d)(1)(C) in the

District Court, Núñez asks us to enforce what he contends was their

waiver below of a defense based on that limitations period.                          He

thus   asks    us,    on   the     basis    of    that   waiver,    to     reject   the

respondents' contention that his petition must now be dismissed as

untimely under § 2244(d)(1)(C).

              In   their     reply,      the      respondents      contest     Núñez's

characterization of their conduct in the District Court, asserting


                                         - 17 -
that they raised the § 2244(d)(1)(C) timeliness issue on "at least

three occasions," identifying (1) their statement at the motion to

dismiss hearing that the petition was also time-barred "tak[ing]

the date that the petitioner filed [his] Rule 192.1 motion" and

"calculat[ing] from the date [that] the [Sánchez Valle] decision

was published," (2) their statement in their answer about the

number of days after Sánchez Valle issued that Núñez filed his

Rule 192.1 motion, and (3) their reference to § 2244(d)(1)(C) in

the   course    of   asserting   the   petition's     untimeliness    under

§ 2244(d)(1)(A). They also point to their response to the District

Court's inquiry regarding the petition's potential untimeliness

under § 2244(d)(1)(C).       Finally, the respondents contend that,

"even if, arguendo, [they] had forfeited [their] [§] 2244(d)(1)(C)

timeliness argument by failing to raise it as an affirmative

defense in [their] responsive pleading, the district court revived

[it] . . . when it sua sponte ordered the parties to address

[§ 2244(d)(1)(C)]" (citing Day v. McDonough, 547 U.S. 198, 209

(2006)).

           As   we   will   explain,   we   agree   with   Núñez   that   the

respondents waived any contention that the petition was untimely

based on § 2244(d)(1)(C) by knowingly failing to assert that ground

for untimeliness in their answer to his petition.             The District

Court thus abused its discretion in raising sua sponte and then

addressing the § 2244(d)(1)(C) defense after the respondents had


                                  - 18 -
already relinquished it.             See Day, 547 U.S. at 210 n.11; Wood v.

Milyard, 566 U.S. 463, 474 (2012).               Moreover, because the District

Court's adjudication of the equitable tolling issue both followed

from and depends on the waived § 2244(d)(1)(C) defense, we need

not address whether the District Court erred in applying the

doctrine of equitable tolling.                And so, because the respondents

assert    on    appeal     no    basis    independent       from       the   petition's

untimeliness       under     § 2244(d)(1)(C)        for     our       overturning    the

District Court's ruling granting Núñez's petition, we affirm the

judgment granting the petition.

                                           A.

               "Ordinarily      in   civil      litigation,       a    statutory    time

limitation is forfeited if not raised in a defendant's answer or

in an amendment thereto."            Day, 547 U.S. at 202; see also Fed. R.

Civ. P. 8(c); Habeas Rule 5(b).                 And because "the principle of

party presentation [is] basic to our adversary system," Wood, 566

U.S. at 472, a court generally may not raise an affirmative

defense, such as a statute of limitations defense, that a party

has not itself raised. In the habeas context, however, the Supreme

Court    has    recognized      a    modest     exception     to      this   principle,

affirming the "district court's authority to consider a forfeited

habeas defense when extraordinary circumstances so warrant," id.

at 471 (citing Day, 547 U.S. at 201) (emphasis added), such as




                                         - 19 -
when        the    government's    failure   to   assert    the   defense   is

"inadvertent," id. at 473.10

                  The Supreme Court has made clear, however, that, "should

a State intelligently choose to waive a statute of limitations

defense, a district court would not be at liberty to disregard

that choice."          Day, 547 U.S. at 210 n.11 (emphasis added); see

Wood, 566 U.S. at 471 n.5 (noting that a federal court only has

authority to "resurrect" forfeited defenses).              For that reason, a

district court has no             "discretion to take up [a] timeliness

[defense]" sua sponte "when [the government] is aware of [the]

limitations defense and intelligently chooses not to rely on it,"

Wood, 566 U.S. at 466, or when the defense is "strategically

withh[e]ld," id. at 472 (quoting Day, 547 U.S. at 211).              In those

circumstances, the government has waived the defense by "knowingly

and intelligently relinquish[ing]" it.            Id. at 470 n.4.

                  The Supreme Court's decisions in Day v. McDonough, 547

U.S. 198, and Wood v. Milyard, 566 U.S. 463, illustrate the



       We note that when a respondent's failure to properly raise
       10

a defense amounts only to forfeiture, the district court is under
"no obligation to assist attorneys representing the State" by
raising the defense sua sponte, but neither is the court required
to "suppress [its] knowledge" of the government's mistake. Day v.
McDonough, 547 U.S. 198, 210 (2006). A court's discretion to raise
the defense is also limited by its obligation to give fair notice,
id., and to "determine whether the interests of justice would be
better served by addressing the merits or by dismissing the
petition as time barred," Wood v. Milyard, 566 U.S. 463, 472 (2012)
(quoting Day, 547 U.S. at 210-11) (internal quotation marks
omitted).


                                      - 20 -
difference between the government's forfeiture of a limitations

defense, such that a federal court may raise it sua sponte, and

its waiver of a limitations defense, such that a court may not.

See Wood, 566 U.S. at 470 n.4 (explaining that the "distinction

between defenses that are 'waived' and those that are 'forfeited'"

is "key").     It is thus useful to begin our analysis by reviewing

those precedents.    We then will be well-positioned to explain why

we conclude that the respondents waived below the affirmative

defense predicated on § 2244(d)(1)(C) that the District Court sua

sponte put in play (only to then reject it on equitable tolling

grounds) and that they now assert as the only basis for reversal

on appeal.

                                   1.

          In Day, the Supreme Court concluded that the district

court had not erred in raising the statute of limitations sua

sponte because the state had merely forfeited rather than waived

the defense.    See 547 U.S. at 202; see also Wood, 566 U.S. at 471

n.5 ("[W]e made clear in [Day] that a federal court has the

authority to resurrect only forfeited defenses.").       There, the

state had asserted     in a   responsive pleading that   the   habeas

petition had been "filed after 352 days of untolled time," and was

therefore "timely."    547 U.S. at 203.   But the state's assertion

of timeliness was based on an "evident miscalculation of the

elapsed time."     Id. at 202.   Catching this "obvious computation


                                 - 21 -
error," the lower court raised the issue of timeliness sua sponte

and dismissed the petition.        Id. at 204, 209.         Affirming, the

Supreme    Court   concluded   that,   confronted   with   a   "plain"   and

"inadvertent error," the lower court did not abuse its discretion

in raising the limitations defense sua sponte.             Id. at 211; see

also Wood, 566 U.S. at 473 ("In [Day] . . . we emphasized[] [that]

the State's concession of timeliness resulted from 'inadvertent

error.'" (quoting Day, 547 U.S. at 211)). It emphasized, however,

that the lower court "would not [have] be[en] at liberty to

disregard" an "intelligent[] . . .         waive[r]" of a      limitations

defense.    Day, 547 U.S. at 210 n.11.

            In Wood, by contrast, the Supreme Court concluded that

just such a waiver had occurred, and that the court of appeals had

therefore abused its discretion in raising the limitations issue

sua sponte on appeal.11    566 U.S. at 474.     There, the state "twice

informed the [d]istrict [c]ourt that it '[would] not challenge,

but [was] not conceding' the timeliness of Wood's petition."             Id.

The state had asserted in a pre-answer motion that the petition

was "arguabl[y]" untimely but indicated to the court that it would


     11Wood, unlike Day, involved the discretion of the court of
appeals -- rather than the district court -- to raise the
timeliness of a habeas petition sua sponte.     That distinction,
however, is immaterial to its waiver analysis, which turned on
whether the state's conduct in the district court amounted to the
"intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known right."
Wood, 566 U.S. at 474 (quoting Kontrick v. Ryan, 540 U.S. 443, 458
n.13 (2004)). That analysis is equally applicable here.


                                  - 22 -
not challenge the petition on those grounds, opting to rely on a

different set of defenses instead.           Id. at 469-70.     On appeal, the

Tenth Circuit nonetheless dismissed the petition as untimely.                 Id.

at 468.

            The Supreme Court reversed.          Id. at 474.     It concluded

that the court of appeals had abused its discretion in overlooking

the state's waiver of the limitations defense.             Id.     Emphasizing

that "[w]aiver is the 'intentional relinquishment or abandonment

of a known right," the Court reasoned that the state's conduct in

that case "fit[] that description." Id. (quoting Kontrick v. Ryan,

540 U.S. 443, 458 n.13 (2004)).

            Unlike in Day, the Court explained, the state's decision

not   to   raise   a   timeliness    defense     "did   not     stem   from   an

'inadvertent error.'"      Id. (quoting Day, 547 U.S. at 211).           To the

contrary,   the    state   had   "express[ed]     its   clear    and   accurate

understanding of the timeliness issue" and "yet it chose, in no

uncertain terms, to refrain from interposing" such a defense.                 Id.

This conduct, the Court concluded, amounted to waiver of the

limitations defense.       Id.

                                      2.

            Here, like in Day and Wood, the respondents failed to

assert as a defense in the District Court that Núñez's petition

was untimely under the limitations period that the District Court

ultimately treated as being applicable.             At no point in their


                                    - 23 -
answer -- or, for that matter, in their motion to dismiss or any

other pre-answer filing -- did they assert that the petition was

untimely      under       the   limitations    period   set    forth      by

§ 2244(d)(1)(C).      Instead, the respondents contended in both their

motion to dismiss and their answer that the limitations period was

not set by § 2244(d)(1)(C) because Sánchez Valle did not trigger

that provision.       Their sole limitations defense in those filings

was that the petition was untimely under the limitations period

set forth by § 2244(d)(1)(A).12

             Moreover, unlike in Day, there is no basis for concluding

that the respondents acted inadvertently in failing to assert in

their answer that the petition was untimely under the limitations

period that they now ask us to apply -- § 2244(d)(1)(C).              To the

contrary, the respondents themselves specified in their answer the

date on which Núñez's Rule 192.1 motion was filed, as well as the

fact that the motion post-dated Sánchez Valle by more than 365

days.     Indeed, the respondents even discussed § 2244(d)(1)(C) in

their     answer   when    asserting   their   timeliness   defense    under

§ 2244(d)(1)(A).      Clearly, then, they were aware of the potential

relevance of the alternative limitations date supplied by that




     12 Notwithstanding the respondents' primary contention that
§ 2244(d)(1)(A) and not § 2244(d)(1)(C) set the relevant
limitations period, the respondents were in no way prevented from
raising, in the alternative, a timeliness defense under the latter
provision.


                                    - 24 -
provision.    And yet, in setting forth their affirmative defenses

in the answer, the respondents did not oppose the petition on the

ground that it would have been untimely even under § 2244(d)(1)(C).

They instead contended only that Sánchez Valle does not state a

retroactively applicable rule and that § 2244(d)(1)(C) therefore

does not apply.

            We recognize that the respondents did state at the

District Court's hearing on their motion to dismiss that the

petition was not only "time-barred . . . taking [as] a start date[]

the date that the petitioner's conviction and sentence became

final," but also "calculat[ing] from the date that the [Sánchez

Valle] decision was published."          However, that bare statement does

not alter our analysis. The respondents not only failed to explain

it at the hearing, but also never pressed it in any of their

responsive filings -- not the motion to dismiss, which preceded

the hearing, and not the answer, which followed it.

            In other words, the respondents plainly "knew [they] had

an      'arguable'     statute     of     limitations      defense"        under

§ 2244(d)(1)(C), and yet they chose not to "interpos[e]" that

defense in their answer.         Wood, 566 U.S. at 474.         Instead, the

respondents asserted only a defense under § 2244(d)(1)(A) based on

their    contention    that    Sánchez     Valle    was   not   retroactively

applicable    and     that    § 2244(d)(1)(A)      therefore    supplied     the

applicable limitations date. In choosing to make only this limited


                                   - 25 -
argument to the District Court in their answer, the respondents

"deliberately steered the District Court away from the question

[of the petition's timeliness under § 2244(d)(1)(C)] and towards

the [question of Sánchez Valle's retroactivity]."13                    Id.

                  Of course, the District Court thereafter did sua sponte

raise       the    possibility   that     the     petition    was    untimely   under

§ 2244(d)(1)(C).           And the respondents did then assert that they

would not waive the statute of limitations.                   But the respondents

made        that     representation        only     after     they     had   already

"knowingly . . .           relinquish[ed]"        their   statute-of-limitations-

based defense under § 2244(d)(1)(C) by their conscious choice not

to raise it in their answer despite plainly being aware of its

availability as a defense.            See id. at 470 n.4.           As a result, the

respondents cannot now contend that § 2244(d)(1)(C) provides a

viable basis to reverse the District Court.                    Whether or not the

District Court did err in its application of the equitable tolling

doctrine,          that   doctrine   is    of     relevance   to     the   petition's



        We note that it hardly would have been absurd for the
       13

respondents to have opted to defend Núñez's petition on the basis
that Sánchez Valle did not establish a new, retroactively
applicable rule, without contending in the alternative that, even
if Sánchez Valle did establish such a rule, Núñez could not benefit
from it. After all, the applicable limitations period would have
been tolled by Núñez's filing of a Rule 192.1 motion in the Puerto
Rico courts during that period. See 28 U.S.C. § 2244(d)(2). If
Núñez had filed his Rule 192.1 motion eleven days earlier, then
that filing would have tolled the limitations period, and would
likely have rendered timely his federal habeas petition, which he
contends he filed as soon as his Rule 192.1 motion was denied.


                                          - 26 -
timeliness only insofar as the limitations period in play is the

one set forth by § 2244(d)(1)(C).              But, because the respondents,

in their answer, intelligently chose not to make any arguments

about   the    petition's   untimeliness        under    that   provision,   they

waived the defense and may not now independently raise it as a

basis for reversal on appeal.

              The respondents do contend that, to the extent they

"failed to raise" a § 2244(d)(1)(C) defense, the District Court

"revived" that defense when it raised the petition's untimeliness

under § 2244(d)(1)(C) sua sponte.              However, the respondents only

assert that the District Court must be understood to have "revived"

that defense insofar as they "forfeited" it. They make no argument

that the District Court must be understood to have "revived" their

§ 2244(d)(1)(C) defense if they waived it -- nor, as both Day and

Wood make clear, could they.            And because we conclude that the

respondents'     knowing    failure    to   assert      § 2244(d)(1)(C)   as    an

affirmative defense in their answer amounted to a waiver of that

defense, the District Court had no authority to "revive" it.                   See

id. at 471 n.5 ("[A] federal court has the authority to resurrect

only forfeited defenses.").

              In so concluding, we also emphasize that this case is

not like Dimott v. United States, 881 F.3d 232 (1st Cir. 2018), in

which we concluded that the court of appeals could excuse the

government's failure to raise a timeliness defense below, even


                                      - 27 -
though that case did not involve a "clear computation error." Day,

547 U.S. at 210.       That case, unlike this one, did not involve the

respondent "expressing its clear and accurate understanding of the

timeliness issue."           Dimott, 881 F.3d at 238 (quoting Wood, 566

U.S. at 474).    We thus emphasized there that the facts of the case

demonstrated     that    the     government      had    acted     no   more   than

"inadverten[tly]"       in    failing    to   raise    the   timeliness   defense

below.    Id. at 238-39.

           Reinforcing the difference between Dimott and this case

is the fact that in Dimott both the timeliness issue and the merits

issue turned on whether the petitioner had stated a claim under

the new rule announced in Johnson v. United States, 576 U.S. 591

(2015).   Dimott, 881 F.3d at 239.            Thus, because the "crux" of the

timeliness and merits issues were the same, the government in that

case had little to gain from "strategically withh[o]ld[ing] the

[limitations] defense."           Id. (first and third alterations in

original) (quoting Wood, 566 U.S. at 472); see also id. at 239

(explaining     that    there    was     no   risk    that   in   bypassing   the

government's failure to raise the statute of limitations, the court

would "reward[] the [g]overnment for any gamesmanship").

           Here, however, the respondents opted in their answer to

the petition to        rely solely on the limitations defense that

dovetailed with their merits argument: that Sánchez Valle is not

retroactively applicable.         They thus did not advance the distinct


                                        - 28 -
argument that the petition would be untimely even if Sánchez Valle

were retroactively applicable.             As a result, their contention that

the    petition      was   meritless       because      Sánchez       Valle      was   not

retroactive, while perfectly mirroring their separate contention

that the petition also was untimely under § 2244(d)(1)(A), in no

way teed up or necessitated consideration of whether the petition

was independently untimely under § 2244(d)(1)(C).                          In fact, in

raising the question of whether the petition was untimely under

the limitations period set forth by § 2244(d)(1)(C), the District

Court emphasized that the parties had not in their prior filings

addressed that issue.

             We note as well that the persistent lack of interest

that   the   respondents       demonstrated        in    pressing      a     limitations

defense    under     § 2244(d)(1)(C),       in    favor       of    crystallizing      the

retroactivity      issue    for    the    court,     continued        even    after    the

District     Court    raised      the    § 2244(d)(1)(C)           issue   sua    sponte.

Although the respondents did agree with the District Court's

observation that Núñez's petition "appear[ed] untimely" even if

Sánchez    Valle     applied   retroactively,           the    respondents       did   not

discuss § 2244(d)(1)(C) in responding to the District Court's

inquiry as to whether they would waive the statute of limitations.

The respondents instead continued to treat the issue as merely

implicating the retroactivity of Sánchez Valle.                     Explaining why it

would not waive the limitations defense, the respondents argued


                                         - 29 -
that   "appl[ying]        [Sánchez    Valle]        retroactively . . .      would

overturn    almost   30     years'    worth    of    convictions"   and   "would

seriously undermine the principle of finality which is essential

to . . . our criminal justice system."                 Only on appeal do the

respondents now focus their attention squarely on defending the

petition's untimeliness under § 2244(d)(1)(C), forgoing entirely

any reliance on the arguments they advanced below.

                                        B.

            For these reasons, we conclude that the respondents

"intelligently"       waived     their         limitations      defense      under

§ 2244(d)(1)(C) by knowingly failing to assert it in their answer.

As a result, we conclude that, to the extent the District Court

"disregard[ed]"      that    waiver    by      raising    and   addressing     the

§ 2244(d)(1)(C) defense sua sponte, it abused its discretion in

doing so.    Day, 547 U.S. at 210 n.11.               Because the respondents

advance on appeal no defense to the petition other than the one

that we conclude they waived below, we see no basis for disturbing

the District Court's ruling granting the petition.

                                       III.

            The judgment of the District Court is affirmed.




                                      - 30 -