United States Court of Appeals
                      For the First Circuit


No. 24-1905

                          LORNA ORABONA,

                      Plaintiff, Appellant,

                                v.

                      SANTANDER BANK, N.A.,

                       Defendant, Appellee.


          APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                FOR THE DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND

           [Hon. Mary S. McElroy, U.S. District Judge]


                              Before

                   Gelpí, Lynch, and Thompson,
                         Circuit Judges.


     Jennifer L. Sylvia, with whom Moses Ryan Ltd. was on brief,
for appellant.

     Leslie D. Parker, with whom Brenna Anatone Force, Brendan F.
Ryan, and Adler Pollock & Sheehan P.C. were on brief, for appellee.


                          June 16, 2025
             LYNCH, Circuit Judge.         Santander Bank, N.A. terminated

Lorna Orabona's employment as a high-earning mortgage development

officer     for    cause,     notifying   her   that   she   had   violated    the

company's Code of Conduct client privacy policy.               In consequence,

she was not eligible for severance benefits under its Employee

Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) Severance Policy.                 Orabona

did   not   employ      the   administrative    procedure     under    the   ERISA

Severance Policy.           Rather, she sued under state law in multiple

counts sounding in both tort and contract.                   She alleged that

Santander      had     terminated   her   employment    to   avoid    paying   her

severance benefits under the Policy. After discovery, the district

court entered summary judgment for Santander on the grounds that

Orabona's claims were expressly preempted by ERISA section 514(a),

29 U.S.C. § 1144(a).

             We reject Orabona's arguments on appeal and hold that

her claims are preempted by ERISA, because all of her claims

"relate to" the Severance Policy as the court must refer to that

Policy to determine both liability and damages as to each claim,

see 29 U.S.C. § 1144(a), and, as to her claims seeking relief for

the   denial      of   severance    benefits,   they   "conflict[]      with   the

remedial scheme established by 29 U.S.C. § 1132(a)."                  See Cannon

v. Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Mass., Inc., 132 F.4th 86, 88

(1st Cir. 2025).




                                       - 2 -
                                          I.

              On review of a grant of summary judgment, we recite the

facts    in   the     light   most     favorable    to     the   nonmoving      party,

"indulging all reasonable inferences in [Orabona's] favor, but

paying no heed to conclusory allegations, improbable inferences,

[or] unsupported speculation."             Quintana-Dieppa v. Dep't of Army,

130 F.4th 1, 7 (1st Cir. 2025) (quoting McCarthy v. Nw. Airlines,

Inc., 56 F.3d 313, 315 (1st Cir. 1995) (internal quotation marks

omitted)).     We draw the facts "from the record and discovery as to

[the Severance Policy]."              Cannon, 132 F.4th at 88.           The summary

judgment record includes Orabona's unverified complaint; Orabona's

supporting     affidavit;       the    deposition     of   Santander's        30(b)(6)

witness Michael Pagano, head of Employment Relations; and an

affidavit     by     Santander's      counsel,   attaching       the    Santander    US

Enterprise      Severance      Policy     effective      July 21,      2021    through

July 17,      2022    (the    "Severance    Policy"),       Forms      5500   for   the

Severance Policy for the years 2020 through 2022,1 a December 9,

2021 email from Santander HR to Orabona which included a link to

a summary of the 2020 Form 5500 for the Severance Policy, and the

Santander US Code of Conduct as of December 16, 2021.                    There is no




     1    Form 5500 is an informational return used "to satisfy
annual reporting requirements under Title I and Title IV of ERISA
and under the Internal Revenue Code." U.S. Dep't of Lab., Form
5500 Series, https://perma.cc/J925-V6ZD.


                                         - 3 -
dispute as to the authenticity of Santander's Severance Policy and

Forms, Code of Conduct, and the December 9, 2021 email.2

A. The Termination of Orabona's Employment

                 Orabona's complaint states that the lawsuit "arises out

of the wrongful, unlawful actions by [Santander] in interfering

with and preventing [her] from continuing in her employment and

receiving her entitlement to employee benefits."

                 Orabona was hired by Sovereign Bank in 2008 as a Mortgage

Development Officer (MDO), and Santander became Orabona's employer

when it acquired Sovereign in 2013.               She was "one of the top five

MDO performers in the country for Santander overall," and her

wages, which were based only on commission, were $525,000 in 2020

and $680,000 in 2021.

                 On   or   about    January 18,     2022,   Orabona   told     her

supervisor at Santander that she had an offer of employment from

Citizens Bank, "but she was still considering staying at Santander

and wanted to re-negotiate her salary."               Her supervisor responded

that       "he   wanted    [her    to]   stay    and . . . would   talk   to   his

supervisors and get back to her to work something out."




       2  Though Orabona disputed the authenticity of and moved to
strike Santander's December 9, 2021 email before the district
court, the court denied her motion to strike, and Orabona did not
appeal that denial, so we consider the email to be unrefuted
evidence.


                                         - 4 -
          On January 21, 2022, a Santander employee from Spain who

"was not [Orabona's] supervisor" and did not "even work[] in her

department," joined by a Santander HR employee and a Santander IT

employee, called Orabona and informed her that her employment was

terminated    effective     immediately,      for   cause,   because     she    had

forwarded company emails from her company email address to her

private email address.3         Orabona's affidavit states that:

          [The Santander employee] advised me that I was
          terminated for cause and all of my benefits,
          including    my   healthcare,   were   ceasing
          immediately.    I was also advised that if I
          took any further actions, such as appealing my
          termination    or   applying   for   benefits,
          Santander would report to the Nationwide
          Multistate Licensing System ("NMLS") that I
          had committed misconduct thereby attempting to
          get my license revoked.

Santander's     30(b)(6)    witness     testified     that    "[u]sually        the

manager . . . communicat[es]          that     the     employee     is     being

terminated," and a member of the Employment Relations team, which

is   entirely    based     in   the   United    States,      "support[s]       that

communication, answer[s] any questions the employee may have, and

provide[s] an overview of what they can expect from a benefits

standpoint after their departure."



     3    Orabona's affidavit states that she "did not accept the
offer and/or start employment with Citizens Bank until January 24,
2022, after [her] termination from Santander," but Santander
contests this, noting that "according to Orabona’s registration on
the Nationwide Multistate Licensing System ("NMLS"), Orabona began
employment as a Citizens employee on . . . January 18, 2022." Our
disposition does not turn on this dispute.


                                      - 5 -
             Orabona        says    she    received       no   warning   or     initial

reprimand prior to the termination of her employment.                          She says

that she had only forwarded company emails "due to working remotely

during the state of emergencies for the COVID-19 pandemic since

March 2020,"       that     all company       emails      she had forwarded          were

"encrypted and did not contain any personal information," and that

"[o]ther Santander employees had [also] been forwarding company

emails to their private email due to working remotely" but "were

not reprimanded or terminated."               Orabona says that the forwarded

company     emails    were    mortgage      pre-approval       letters    for    client

referrals, and she does not deny that they contained confidential

client and Santander business information.

             "Around the latter part of the fourth quarter of 2021

and prior to [her] termination," Santander decided to completely

exit the U.S. residential mortgage market, which "would lead to

the layoffs of all MDOs in the residential mortgages department,

which was Orabona's department."                   "On or about February 1, 2022

(only   a    few     days    after       Orabona    was    terminated),       Santander

officially     announced           the    massive     national       layoff     in   its

residential lending department," which terminated all MDOs in

Orabona's department and eliminated her position.

             Orabona says the reasons Santander gave for terminating

her   employment      were     pretextual      and     that    the    timing    of   her

January 21, 2022 termination was pretextual because that timing


                                           - 6 -
was meant to render her ineligible for severance benefits under

the February 1, 2022 announcement.               Santander HR had emailed

Orabona a summary of the Form 5500 for the 2020 Severance Policy

on December 9, 2021, prior to her termination.4

                Orabona concedes she "took no steps to appeal [her]

termination or apply for any benefits."            Her affidavit attributes

her failure to appeal to her reliance on the alleged statements

made       by   the   Santander   employee    during    the   January 21,   2022

termination call that Orabona was ineligible for benefits and that

Santander would report her to the licensing board if she took

further actions, such as appealing her termination or applying for

benefits.         Santander's     30(b)(6)    witness    testified   that   "any

employee" may "file a claim to HR asking for severance benefits,"

including an employee who was "terminated for cause but believe[d]

they[] [were] still . . . entitled to severance."

                The gravamen of Orabona's lawsuit is that "a possible

severance payout to [her would have been] significant" and so

"Santander fraudulently advised [her] she was terminated for cause


       4  Orabona says that she did not receive a separation guide
upon her termination and that normally Santander would send
terminated employees such a guide, but it is unclear from
Santander's 30(b)(6) witness whether that practice is customary
for employees terminated for cause. Santander's 30(b)(6) witness
testified   that   the   separation    guide   did   not   contain
"anything . . . referencing at all the [S]everance [P]olicy" but
rather included information such as about COBRA benefits and how
to convert a life insurance policy. In any event, the preemption
issue is unaffected by this.


                                      - 7 -
and concealed the planned large-scal[e] layoff to deprive her of

any   eligibility   of   benefits,    including     but   not    limited    to,

severance."   These allegations reference the Severance Policy, to

which we now turn.

B. The ERISA Severance Policy

           The ERISA Severance Policy states the terms of employee

eligibility   and   calculation      of    severance   benefits,     reserves

discretion to Santander, and sets forth appeals rights.5                     It

provides, inter alia, that:

1. "It is the current policy of [Santander] to provide severance

benefits to full or part time Employees whose positions                     are

involuntarily terminated . . . as a result of" certain events,

relevantly    including "[a]      workforce      reduction      or   position

elimination."

2. "Employees are not entitled to any severance benefits if their

employment is terminated for any of" a number of non-exhaustive

reasons,   relevantly    including        "[m]isconduct   or    violation    of

company policies, procedures, practices, or the Code of Conduct."

The Code of Conduct contains policies regarding employee use of

corporate assets and provides that employees "shall . . . [n]ot




      5   A separate "Benefits and Payroll Guide for Employees
Eligible for Benefits under the [Severance Policy]" "highlight[s]
key provisions of Santander's benefit plans and programs," such as
COBRA coverage and participation in the 401(k) plan, for eligible
employees.


                                  - 8 -
send,    forward   or    transmit    Santander   US . . . information      to

[their] personal email account, personal messaging application, or

similar platform for any reason."        The Code states that "Employees

who violate the Code will be subject to disciplinary action, up to

and including termination of employment" and that "[i]n general,

employment at Santander US . . . is expressly 'at-will' and may be

terminated at any time by Santander US . . . with or without cause

and with or without notice."

3. Once an employee has been found eligible and qualified for

benefits, receipt of severance benefits is contingent on, inter

alia, the execution of a Separation Agreement and "the Employee

remaining in his/her position through the Employee's Termination

Date."     "If the Employee . . . resigns employment with Santander

US prior to the Termination Date, no severance benefits will be

provided."

4. "For Employees earning commissions, the Severance Pay amount

shall be based on the greater of: (1) Benefits Pay utilized to

determine the salary-related benefits for the year in which the

Employee's Termination Date occurs, or (2) the most recent 6 to 24

months (based on time in commissioned role) of average, annualized

earnings as of the Employee's Termination Date."               For employees

whose severance pay is calculated based on (2) and who have

average,    annualized    earnings    totaling   more   than    $100,000   or




                                     - 9 -
$300,000, severance pay is based on only 80% or 65% of those

earnings, respectively.

5. Santander determines "in its sole discretion . . . whether any

employee or employees will be provided severance benefits; the

terms and conditions for payment of such severance, and whether

such terms and conditions have been satisfied; and the amount of

severance pay and its application in the particular case."

            The Severance Policy further provides that "[a]ll claims

for benefits . . . shall be made in writing to[ ]HR within sixty

(60) days of the alleged occurrence giving rise to the claim" and

an employee may appeal a claim denial "by submitting a written

request for review within sixty (60) days after the date on which

such denial is received."        "An employee must exhaust the claims

and appeal process before filing suit."

C. The District Court Proceedings

            On June 22, 2023, Orabona sued Santander in Rhode Island

Superior Court.     Santander removed the case to federal court and

filed a motion to dismiss all claims for failure to state a claim

and on ERISA preemption grounds, attaching as an exhibit a version

of   the   Severance   Policy.      Orabona     opposed,   disputing     the

"authenticity and accuracy" of Santander's attached Severance

Policy6    and   requesting   "discovery   to   inquire    more   into   the


     6    The version of the Severance Policy Santander attached
to its motion to dismiss had last been approved on July 18, 2022,


                                  - 10 -
applicable terms of the [Policy] and to properly determine whether

this [Policy] is truly one that would be considered an ERISA plan."

The district court denied without prejudice Santander's motion to

dismiss and granted both parties "limited discovery into the

applicability and/or authenticity of the potential ERISA plan

presented by the defendant in support of its Motion to Dismiss."

              After discovery was complete, Orabona filed an amended

complaint alleging claims, all under state law, of breach of

implied contract and covenant of good faith and fair dealing,

wrongful termination, fraud and intentional misrepresentation, and

negligent misrepresentation, seeking for each claim "damages to be

proven   at    trial,   plus   reasonable    attorney's       fees   and     costs,

punitive damages, and all such other relief this Court deems just

and proper."         Santander filed a motion to dismiss the amended

complaint for failure to state a claim and for summary judgment

based    on    ERISA    preemption,      arguing     that     "ERISA       preempts

Plaintiffs' claims because each of her counts 'relates to' the

[ERISA] Plan as the Court would need to refer to [the] Plan to

determine liability and damages."

              On   September 25,   2024,    the    district    court       issued   a

Memorandum     and    Order   granting   Santander's    motion       for    summary




and Orabona contested its authenticity on the grounds that she
"was terminated on January 21, 2022, months prior to [its]
adoption."


                                    - 11 -
judgment on ERISA preemption grounds.     The court held that all of

Orabona's claims were preempted under 29 U.S.C. § 1144(a).        As to

the fraud and negligent misrepresentation claims, the court held

they were preempted because "[t]he damages that naturally flow

from these claims would be the value of [the severance] benefits,

as detailed by the [Severance Policy]," citing, inter alia, Otero

Carrasquillo v. Pharmacia Corp., 466 F.3d 13 (1st Cir. 2006).         As

to the contract and wrongful termination claims, Orabona had

conceded   that   severance   benefits   would   "be    a   portion   of

consequential damages of those claims," and so the court held that

"a calculation of [her] damages would require reference to the

[Severance Policy]."

                                 II.

           We review the district court's grant of summary judgment

de novo and "affirm[] the grant if the record 'presents no genuine

issue as to any material fact and reflects the movant's entitlement

to judgment as a matter of law.'"   Cannon, 132 F.4th at 89 (quoting

Mullane v. U.S. Dep't of Just., 113 F.4th 123, 130 (1st Cir.

2024)).

           All of Orabona's claims are statutorily preempted under

section 514(a) of ERISA, which states that ERISA "shall supersede

any and all State laws insofar as they may now or hereafter relate

to any" ERISA plan.    See 29 U.S.C. § 1144(a).        "The term 'State

law' includes all laws, decisions, rules, regulations, or other


                               - 12 -
State action having the effect of law."         29 U.S.C. § 1144(c)(1).

"[A] state law relates to an ERISA plan if it has a connection

with or reference to such a plan."         Rutledge v. Pharm. Care Mgmt.

Ass'n, 592 U.S. 80, 86 (2020) (alteration in original) (quoting

Egelhoff v. Egelhoff, 532 U.S. 141, 147 (2001)).             This test is

satisfied if "the court's inquiry must be directed to the [ERISA]

plan."    Ingersoll-Rand Co. v. McClendon, 498 U.S. 133, 140 (1990);

see also Hampers v. W.R. Grace & Co., Inc., 202 F.3d 44, 52 (1st

Cir. 2000)("We have consistently held that a cause of action

'relates to' an ERISA plan when a court must evaluate or interpret

the terms of the ERISA-regulated plan to determine liability under

the state law cause of action.").       In determining whether a state

law cause of action is preempted, we look beyond "the form or label

of the law" and to the "facts of the particular case."                 Bos.

Child.'s Heart Found., Inc. v. Nadal-Ginard, 73 F.3d 429, 439-40

(1st Cir. 1996); see also Aetna Health Inc. v. Davila, 542 U.S.

200,     214    (2004)   ("[D]istinguishing    between    pre-empted   and

non-pre-empted claims based on the particular label affixed to

them would 'elevate form over substance and allow parties to evade'

the pre-emptive scope of ERISA simply 'by relabeling their contract

claims as claims for tortious breach of contract.'" (quoting

Allis-Chalmers Corp. v. Lueck, 471 U.S. 202, 211 (1985))).

               As Orabona concedes, each of her claims is "premised

on . . . Santander's       [alleged]   pretextual,       fraudulent,   and


                                  - 13 -
wrongful termination of Orabona for cause in order to [deprive]

her of the benefit of Santander's ERISA severance plan."7               For

several reasons, "[the] court must [thus] evaluate or interpret the

terms    of   the   ERISA-regulated   plan   to    determine   [Santander's]

liability under [Orabona's claims]."              Hampers, 202 F.3d at 52.

The court must consult the Severance Policy to determine whether

Orabona was ineligible for severance benefits because of the

grounds on which Santander terminated her employment.            Because the

Severance Policy renders employees terminated for violating the

Code of Conduct ineligible for severance benefits, the court must

also consult the Code of Conduct in making such a determination.

Further, the court would consult the Severance Policy to determine

whether Orabona would have been eligible for severance benefits

had her employment been terminated under the national layoff rather

than for cause.         The court would also consult the Policy to

determine whether Santander would exercise its reserved discretion

when deciding whether to grant severance benefits.              The Supreme


     7    To the extent that, in spite of this concession, Orabona
attempts to argue that her contract and wrongful termination claims
are premised on Santander's failure to follow proper procedures in
terminating her employment, not on Santander's termination of her
employment for the wrongful reason of depriving her of severance
benefits, we reject the argument.      Looking beyond "particular
label[s] affixed to" Orabona's claims, Davila, 542 U.S. at 214,
Orabona's legal theory as to such claims is that Santander failed
to follow proper procedures because it terminated her employment
not for cause, but to deprive her of severance benefits, and the
court must refer to the Severance Policy to determine Santander's
liability under such a theory.


                                  - 14 -
Court, this court, and our sister circuit courts have held that

state law claims were "related to" ERISA where the employer is

alleged   to   have   taken   actions   to   prevent   the   employee   from

receiving ERISA plan benefits.

           The Ingersoll-Rand decision from the Supreme Court is

remarkably similar to the claims here and requires a finding of

preemption.    In Ingersoll-Rand, the plaintiff had "allege[d] that

his pension would have vested in another four months and that a

principal reason for his termination was the company's desire to

avoid making contributions to his pension fund."               498 U.S. at

135-36.   Confronted with the question of whether ERISA "pre-empts

a state common law claim that an employee was unlawfully discharged

to prevent his attainment of benefits under a plan covered by

ERISA," the Supreme Court held that such a claim was preempted

because, "in order to prevail, a plaintiff must plead, and the

court must find, that an ERISA plan exists and the employer had a

[benefits]-defeating motive in terminating the employment."              Id.

at 135, 140.

           First Circuit law also requires a finding that Orabona's

claims are preempted.     In Otero Carrasquillo, this court held that

the plaintiff's analogous state law claim of fraudulent inducement

was preempted by ERISA.       See 466 F.3d at 20.

           Otero   [had]    allege[d]   that    Pharmacia
           fraudulently induced him to continue his
           employment at the Arecibo plant by incorrectly


                                  - 15 -
            informing him that he could not apply for
            severance benefits until all fermentation at
            Arecibo was completed, changing the benefits
            application deadline without informing him,
            and falsely promising him a comparable
            position at the company whenever he expressed
            concern for his job security.

Id.    We explained that, in order to determine liability, the court

must consult the ERISA severance plan "to identify the application

dates and the administrative process for determining and informing

the employees of such dates" and to "determine whether the offered

microbiologist position was 'comparable' to his prior job as a

research associate."      Id.    Recently, in Cannon, we reaffirmed that

"an impermissible connection with ERISA exists when 'a court must

evaluate or interpret the terms of the ERISA-regulated plan to

determine liability under the state law cause of action,'" and

held    preempted   by   ERISA   the   plaintiff's   state   law    wrongful

death/punitive damages claim, which was based on an assertion that

the defendant's denial of benefits under an ERISA health insurance

policy prematurely caused the decedent's death. 132 F.4th at 88-90

(quoting Hampers, 202 F.3d at 52).

            Our sister circuit courts have also held "state common

law claims of fraudulent or negligent misrepresentation" preempted

by ERISA "when the false representations concern the existence or

extent of benefits under an employee benefit plan."                Griggs v.

E.I. DuPont de Nemours & Co., 237 F.3d 371, 378 (4th Cir. 2001)

(collecting cases from the Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, and Eleventh


                                    - 16 -
circuits); see also Campbell v. Aerospace Corp., 123 F.3d 1308,

1313 (9th Cir. 1997) ("[W]e have held that where the plaintiff's

claim or theory alleged that the employer terminated the employee

to avoid paying benefits or sought to prevent the discharged

employee from obtaining benefits, ERISA preempted the claim.").

Orabona concedes that "reference to Santander's ERISA plan may be

necessary to determine at least a portion of [her] damages."8        The

combination of all of these factors requiring reference to the

ERISA plan documents requires a finding of preemption under 29

U.S.C. § 1144(a).9

           For related reasons, we hold that at least those of

Orabona's claims which seek to recover, under state law, damages

and/or   other   relief   for   the   denial   of   severance   benefits,




     8    Indeed, it is unclear what compensatory damages Orabona
seeks for her claims beyond damages in the amount of her lost
severance benefits. When asked at oral argument what other damages
Orabona was seeking, Orabona's counsel initially stated that
Orabona was seeking health benefits and participation in
"well[ness] programs."    During rebuttal, counsel retracted her
statement as to health benefits.
     9    Orabona argues: "that the calculation of a portion of
Orabona's damages (should she prevail on liability) may
necessitate reference to Santander's severance plan, is (standing
alone against all other material record facts presented here)
plainly an insufficient connection between Orabona's claims and
Santander's plan to support ERISA preemption," again relying on
cases from our sister circuits for support. We need not reach the
issue of whether a claim is preempted only because a court must
reference the ERISA plan to calculate damages, because here, a
court must also reference the Severance Policy and its inclusion
of the Code of Conduct and termination provisions to assess
Santander's liability under Orabona's claims.


                                 - 17 -
duplicate, supplement, or supplant the ERISA remedies. Such claims

are separately preempted under section 502(a) of ERISA, its civil

enforcement provision, which relevantly provides that:

           A civil action may be brought -- (1) by a
           participant . . . (B) to recover benefits due
           to   h[er]   under   the   terms   of   h[er]
           plan . . . [and] (3) . . . (A) to enjoin any
           act or practice which violates any provision
           of this subchapter or the terms of the plan,
           or (B) to obtain other appropriate equitable
           relief (i) to redress such violations or (ii)
           to enforce any provisions of this subchapter
           or the terms of the plan.

29 U.S.C. § 1132(a).       "[T]he detailed provisions of § 502(a) set

forth a comprehensive civil enforcement scheme that represents a

careful balancing of the need for prompt and fair claims settlement

procedures   against      the   public      interest    in   encouraging      the

formation of employee benefit plans."               Pilot Life Ins. Co. v.

Dedeaux, 481 U.S. 41, 54 (1987).          "[A]ny state-law cause of action

that   duplicates,      supplements,      or    supplants    the   ERISA    civil

enforcement remedy conflicts with the clear congressional intent

to make the ERISA remedy exclusive and is therefore pre-empted."

Davila, 542 U.S. at 209.

           Orabona      attempts     an     end   run   around      ERISA     with

allegations that she relied on Santander's allegedly misleading

statements   in   not    appealing    her      termination   or    applying   for

benefits, but ERISA provides an exclusive cause of action in

precisely such circumstances.             Her claims seeking damages for




                                     - 18 -
Santander's termination of her employment to deny her severance

benefits     "fall[]   squarely   within    the    ambit    of    ERISA   § 510,"

Ingersoll-Rand, 498 U.S. at 142, which relevantly states that "[i]t

shall   be     unlawful   for     any   person      to     discharge . . .     a

participant . . . for      the    purpose     of    interfering       with   the

attainment of any right to which such participant may become

entitled under [an ERISA plan]," 29 U.S.C. § 1140.                As the Supreme

Court said of the plaintiff's like claim in Ingersoll-Rand, "[w]e

have no doubt that this claim is prototypical of the kind Congress

intended to cover under § 510," and "§ 502(a) [is] the exclusive

remedy for vindicating § 510–protected rights."                  Id. at 143, 45.

Further, as to such claims, Orabona seeks "to recover benefits due

to [her] under the terms of [her] plan," for which she had a cause

of action under 29 U.S.C. § 1132(a)(1)(B).               See Cannon, 132 F.4th

at 91-92.

             "The mere fact that [Orabona's claims] attempt[] to

[seek] remedies beyond those authorized by ERISA § 502(a)," such

as punitive damages, "[does not] put the claims outside the scope

of the ERISA civil enforcement mechanism."                Davila, 542 U.S. at

214-15. Indeed, it further supports preemption. "Congress' intent

to make the ERISA civil enforcement mechanism exclusive would be

undermined if state causes of action that supplement the ERISA

§ 502(a) remedies were permitted, even if the elements of the state




                                   - 19 -
cause of action did not precisely duplicate the elements of an

ERISA claim."   Id. at 216.

           In short, Orabona could have, but chose not to, file a

claim for benefits under the Severance Policy, appeal any denial

of benefits, and file a legal claim under ERISA.   She may not now

file state law claims which "supplant[] the ERISA civil enforcement

remedy."   Davila, 542 U.S. at 209.

           We affirm the district court's grant of summary judgment

to Santander.




                              - 20 -