FOR PUBLICATION

  UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
       FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

DAVID PETERSEN; JAY                       No. 24-1044
STICKNEY; BEAU WATSON;
                                            D.C. No.
EVAN MERRITT; NORM ALAN
                                         2:22-cv-01674-
PETERSON II; RILEY KORF;
                                              TSZ
RYAN STUPEY; KEVIN
GLEASON,

           Plaintiffs - Appellants,        OPINION

 v.

SNOHOMISH REGIONAL FIRE
AND RESCUE; KEVIN O’BRIEN,
Chief,

           Defendants - Appellees.

      Appeal from the United States District Court
        for the Western District of Washington
       Thomas S. Zilly, District Judge, Presiding

          Argued and Submitted April 3, 2025
                  Portland, Oregon

               Filed September 2, 2025
2                        PETERSEN V. SRFR


     Before: Jay S. Bybee and Danielle J. Forrest, Circuit
       Judges, and Xavier Rodriguez, District Judge. *

                    Opinion by Judge Bybee


                          SUMMARY **


                 Employment Discrimination

    The panel affirmed the district court’s summary
judgment in favor of Snohomish Regional Fire and Rescue
(SRFR) in an action brought by eight firefighters alleging
that, in violation of Title VII and Washington state law,
SRFR failed to accommodate their religious beliefs when it
denied their requests for exemptions from the governor of
Washington’s August 2021 proclamation requiring all
healthcare providers to be vaccinated against COVID-19.
    SRFR ultimately denied the firefighters’ requests
because it was unable to identify a reasonable
accommodation that would allow the firefighters to remain
in their roles without imposing an undue hardship on SRFR.
   The panel held that to establish a failure-to-
accommodate claim for religious discrimination under Title
VII, a plaintiff must first set forth a prima facie case that he
had a bona fide religious belief, the practice of which


*
 The Honorable Xavier Rodriguez, United States District Judge for the
Western District of Texas, sitting by designation.
**
  This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
                       PETERSEN V. SRFR                        3


conflicted with an employment duty; he informed his
employer of the belief and conflict; and the employer
discharged, threatened, or otherwise subjected him to an
adverse employment action because of his inability to fulfill
the job requirement. The burden then shifts to the employer
to show that it initiated good faith efforts to reasonably
accommodate the employee’s religious practices or that it
could not reasonably accommodate the employee without
undue hardship.
    Declining to scrutinize the firefighters’ religious beliefs,
the panel assumed that they set forth a prima facie case. The
panel held that the district court did not err in concluding that
SRFR could not reasonably accommodate the firefighters’
vaccine       exemption        requests       without      undue
hardship. Following Groff v. DeJoy, 600 U.S. 447 (2023),
the panel held that undue hardship is shown when, taking
into account all relevant factors in the case at hand, a burden
is substantial in the overall context of an employer’s
business. SRFR showed that it faced several substantial
costs of accommodating the firefighters’ requested vaccine
exemption, including the health and safety of its own
firefighters and the public, the large number of firefighters
seeking accommodations, the risk to its operations and the
costs of widespread absences, the potential loss of a lucrative
contract, and the risk of additional liability. In addition,
SRFR provided unrebutted medical evidence that showed
the     inadequacy      of     the     firefighters’    proposed
accommodation. The panel concluded that SRFR thus
showed that it could not reasonably have accommodated the
firefighters without undue hardship in October 2021.
4                      PETERSEN V. SRFR


                         COUNSEL

Jennifer W. Kennedy (argued), Law Office of Jennifer W.
Kennedy, Sierra Madre, California; Jonathon Cherne and
Alan J. Reinach, Church State Council, Westlake Village,
California; for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Shannon E. Phillips (argued) and Molly J. Gibbons, Summit
Law Group PLLC, Seattle, Washington, for Defendants-
Appellees.



                          OPINION

BYBEE, Circuit Judge:

    In August 2021, Washington’s governor issued a
proclamation requiring all healthcare providers to be
vaccinated against COVID-19. In response, Defendant
Snohomish Regional Fire and Rescue (SRFR) issued a
vaccine mandate to its firefighters but allowed them to
request accommodations based on their sincerely held
religious beliefs. Plaintiffs, eight SRFR firefighters, did just
that. SRFR ultimately denied these requests because it was
unable to identify a reasonable accommodation that would
allow firefighters to remain in their roles without imposing
an undue hardship on SRFR. Plaintiffs sued under both
federal and Washington law, arguing that SRFR failed to
accommodate their religious beliefs. The district court
granted summary judgment for SRFR, and Plaintiffs
appealed. For the reasons that follow, we affirm.
                        PETERSEN V. SRFR                         5


                     I. BACKGROUND
    SRFR “provides fire suppression and emergency
medical services” in Snohomish County, Washington. Its
service area covers some 135 square miles and 175,000
persons, including 2,500 inmates housed in the Monroe
Correctional Complex, a men’s prison. In 2021, SRFR
responded to 18,000 emergency calls, 85% of which were
for emergency medical services. SRFR maintains eleven
fire stations for its nearly two hundred career firefighters.
The fire stations serve “as a workplace, home, and gym
during a firefighter[’s] . . . 24-hour shift.”
    On August 9, 2021, Washington Governor Jay Inslee
issued Proclamation 21-14 (the Proclamation), which
required healthcare workers to be vaccinated against
COVID-19 by October 2021. 1 The Proclamation stated that
employers should comply with Title VII and the Washington
Law Against Discrimination (WLAD), among other laws.
Specifically, the Proclamation provided that healthcare
workers were “not required to get vaccinated against
COVID-19 if they are entitled . . . [to] a sincerely held
religious belief accommodation.”       The Proclamation
acknowledged that, consistent with Title VII, “such
accommodations” need not be provided by employers “if
they would cause undue hardship.”
    SRFR provided its firefighters with information about
the vaccination requirement and the process for requesting
exemptions. Forty-six of SRFR’s 192 firefighters requested
exemptions, including the eight Plaintiffs.       All the


1
  By the time of the Proclamation, emergency use authorizations had
been approved for the Moderna and Johnson & Johnson vaccines, and
full approval had recently been granted for the Pfizer vaccine.
6                      PETERSEN V. SRFR


firefighters served in various firefighting and emergency
medical technician (EMT) positions, and all held EMT or
paramedic certifications.
    SRFR’s Human Resources staff met with each employee
who requested an exemption to discuss their request and any
possible accommodation. SRFR simultaneously negotiated
with the International Association of Fire Fighters, Local
2781 (the Union) regarding the vaccination requirement, and
eventually “approved a Memorandum of Understanding
(‘MOU’) that modified the collective bargaining agreement
to provide accommodation options for firefighters if [SRFR]
determined they could not be accommodated in their
healthcare roles.”
     In these circumstances, the MOU explained that
unvaccinated firefighters could use their accrued paid leave
while remaining employed. After exhausting that leave,
firefighters could take a one-year leave of absence without
pay. The MOU also provided that if any firefighters chose
to leave SRFR, they could be added to the disability rehire
list, which gave them “priority”—meaning that they would
not lose their rank, seniority, or benefit accrual status if they
returned to SRFR within two years. Additionally, the MOU
“specified that the unvaccinated frontline employees could
return to work during their period of absence if [the]
Proclamation . . . was updated and amended to that effect.”
    In October 2021, SRFR determined that it could not
accommodate unvaccinated firefighters in their firefighting
roles without imposing an undue hardship on its operations.
SRFR explained that because a firefighter’s work requires
interfacing with the public, it did not have alternative
positions for those seeking exemptions, nor could it facilitate
their requested accommodation—masking, testing, and
                             PETERSEN V. SRFR                    7


social distancing. SRFR encouraged all forty-six employees
to use their accumulated leave days first and then apply for
a one-year leave of absence. SRFR approved all such
requests.
    SRFR continued to monitor information from public
health authorities regarding COVID-19 conditions and the
risks to its operations, its employees, and the community in
2021 and into 2022. In May 2022, after the Omicron wave
of COVID-19 had subsided, SRFR notified unvaccinated
employees that they could either remain on leave or “return
to their patient-care roles, following all applicable . . .
guidelines.” Four Plaintiffs returned to work shortly after;
others returned later.
    Six months later, in November 2022, Plaintiffs filed suit
against SRFR, Fire Chief Kevin O’Brien, 2 and unnamed
defendants, and asserted two causes of action: (1) a failure
to accommodate their religious beliefs in violation of 42
U.S.C. § 2000(e) (Title VII); and (2) a violation of WLAD.
Plaintiffs sought a “declaration that, under these
circumstances, a leave of absence falls short of lawful
reasonable accommodation” under either Title VII or
WLAD. They also asked for damages and other relief.
    SRFR moved for summary judgment. It argued that
Plaintiffs’ Title VII and WLAD claims should be dismissed
because Plaintiffs’ exemptions could not be accommodated
without undue hardship to SRFR. Plaintiffs moved for
partial summary judgment and argued that SRFR failed to
accommodate their exemption requests. The district court
granted summary judgment for SRFR. The court assumed
that Plaintiffs had established a bona fide religious objection

2
    The parties later stipulated to Chief O’Brien’s dismissal.
8                     PETERSEN V. SRFR


to the vaccination. It then found that accommodating
Plaintiffs’ objections would impose an undue hardship on
SRFR’s operations. The court ruled that the undisputed
evidence showed that “allowing unvaccinated firefighters to
work would increase the risk of spreading COVID-19 even
with the use of masks and [personal protective equipment
(PPE)] because masks and PPE are effective only when worn
and firefighters could not always wear masks and PPE.” The
court further found that “the uncontroverted evidence in this
case demonstrates that unvaccinated firefighters were at a
higher risk of contracting and transmitting COVID-19 even
with the use of masks, PPE, testing, and social distancing.”
“Moreover, the fact that 46 out of 192 Snohomish Fire
firefighters requested an exemption and accommodation
increased Snohomish Fire’s hardship and the risks associated
with accommodating Plaintiffs in their patient-care roles
while living and working in fire stations.”
    The court entered final judgment for SRFR, and
Plaintiffs timely appealed.
    II. JURISDICTION AND STANDARD OF REVIEW
    We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. We
review the district court’s summary judgment decision “de
novo, viewing the evidence and drawing all reasonable
inferences in the light most favorable to the non-moving
party.” Edwards v. Wells Fargo & Co., 606 F.3d 555, 557
(9th Cir. 2010).
                     III.   ANALYSIS
    We begin by setting out the legal framework and then
discuss its application in this case.
                        PETERSEN V. SRFR                        9


A. Religious Discrimination Under Title VII
    1. Title VII’s burden-shifting framework
    Title VII makes it “an unlawful employment practice for
an employer . . . to discharge any individual, or otherwise to
discriminate against any individual . . . because of such
individual’s . . . religion.” 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(a). For
purposes of Title VII, “[t]he term ‘religion’ includes all
aspects of religious observance and practice . . . unless an
employer demonstrates that he is unable to reasonably
accommodate to an employee’s . . . religious observance or
practice without undue hardship on the conduct of the
employer’s business.” Id. § 2000e(j). Accordingly, “[a]
claim for religious discrimination under Title VII can be
asserted under several different theories, including . . . failure
to accommodate.” Peterson v. Hewlett-Packard Co., 358
F.3d 599, 603 (9th Cir. 2004). To do so:

        [A plaintiff] must first set forth a prima facie
        case that (1) he had a bona fide religious
        belief, the practice of which conflicts with an
        employment duty; (2) he informed his
        employer of the belief and conflict; and
        (3) the employer discharged, threatened, or
        otherwise subjected him to an adverse
        employment action because of his inability to
        fulfill the job requirement.

Id. at 606. Once a plaintiff “makes out a prima facie failure-
to-accommodate case, the burden then shifts to [the
employer] to show that it initiated good faith efforts to
accommodate reasonably the employee’s religious practices
or that it could not reasonably accommodate the employee
10                        PETERSEN V. SRFR


without undue hardship.” Id. (internal quotation marks and
citations omitted).
    Here, the district court “decline[d] to scrutinize
Plaintiffs’ religious beliefs” and “assume[d] that Plaintiffs
have established a bona fide religious belief and have set
forth their prima facie case.” On appeal, SRFR does not take
issue with this assumption. We, too, decline to scrutinize
Plaintiffs’ religious beliefs and assume they have set forth a
prima facie case. On appeal of summary judgment, that
leaves us with one straightforward question: Whether the
district court erred in concluding that SRFR could not
reasonably accommodate Plaintiffs’ vaccine exemption
requests without undue hardship. 3
     2. “Undue hardship” after Groff v. DeJoy
    As we discussed above, Title VII “requires employers to
accommodate the religious practice of their employees
unless doing so would impose an ‘undue hardship on the
conduct of the employer’s business.’” Groff v. DeJoy, 600
U.S. 447, 453–54 (2023) (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 2000e(j)); see
also Bolden-Hardge v. Off. of Cal. State Controller, 63 F.4th

3
  We consider the Title VII and WLAD claims simultaneously because
the Washington standard mirrors the federal one. At the time of the
district court’s decision, a defendant in Washington could show undue
hardship so long as accommodating a plaintiff’s request imposed “more
than a de minimis cost” on its business. Kumar v. Gate Gourmet Inc.,
325 P.3d 193, 203 (Wash. 2014) (en banc) (quoting Trans World
Airlines, Inc. v. Hardison, 432 U.S. 63, 84 (1977)). Nonetheless, the
district court evaluated the WLAD claim under the more difficult federal
standard, which requires “substantial increased costs.” Last year,
Washington adopted the substantial cost test. See Suarez v. State, 552
P.3d 786, 798–99 (Wash. 2024) (en banc). Washington courts “look to
federal case law” to guide their interpretation of WLAD. Kumar, 325
P.3d at 197.
                       PETERSEN V. SRFR                      11


1215, 1224 (9th Cir. 2023) (“Undue hardship is an
affirmative defense . . . .”). In Groff, the Supreme Court
clarified how lower courts should conduct the undue
hardship analysis. Nearly fifty years ago, in Trans World
Airlines, Inc. v. Hardison, 432 U.S. 63 (1977), the Court
suggested that an employer need not demonstrate “more than
a de minimis cost” to show “undue hardship.” Id. at 84. In
Groff, the Court observed that “Hardison’s reference to ‘de
minimis’ . . . was fleeting” and, when divorced from the
context of Hardison, unfortunate. 600 U.S. at 465. The
Court clarified that “showing ‘more than a de minimis cost’
. . . does not suffice to establish ‘undue hardship’ under Title
VII.” Id. at 468. The Court held that “‘undue hardship’ is
shown when a burden is substantial in the overall context of
an employer’s business.” Id. The Court continued:

       [A] hardship is more severe than a mere
       burden. So even if Title VII said only that an
       employer need not be made to suffer a
       “hardship,” an employer could not escape
       liability simply by showing that an
       accommodation would impose some sort of
       additional costs. Those costs would have to
       rise to the level of hardship, and adding the
       modifier “undue” means that the requisite
       burden, privation, or adversity must rise to an
       “excessive” or “unjustifiable” level. . . . [W]e
       are pointed toward something closer
       to . . . “substantial additional costs” or
       “substantial expenditures.”

Id. at 469 (citations omitted).
12                     PETERSEN V. SRFR


    The Court counseled us to “apply the test in a manner
that takes into account all relevant factors in the case at hand,
including the particular accommodations at issue and their
practical impact in light of the nature, size and operating cost
of [an] employer,” to see if “the burden of granting an
accommodation would result in substantial increased costs
in relation to the conduct of its particular business.” Id. at
470–71 (alteration in original) (quotation marks and
citations omitted). In the end, “‘undue hardship’ in Title VII
means what it says,” id. at 471, and proof of hardship to the
employer is not sufficient—the hardship must be undue, see
id. at 471–72. By way of example, the Court offered that
“forcing other employees to work overtime would [not]
constitute an undue hardship,” id. at 473, without
considering other options such as “temporary costs,
voluntary shift swapping, occasional shift swapping, or
administrative costs,” id. at 471 (citing EEOC Guidelines,
29 C.F.R. § 1605.2(d)).
    We have not had occasion to grapple with how exactly
we should “take[] into account all relevant factors.” Id. at
470. To date, we have cited Groff just four times in
published cases. None of our citations are precedential here.
See Damiano v. Grants Pass Sch. Dist. No. 7, 140 F.4th 1117,
1155 (9th Cir. 2025) (citing Groff once to establish that
“[d]iscrimination on the basis of religious beliefs is
discrimination on the basis of religion for purposes of Title
VII”); Apache Stronghold v. United States, 95 F.4th 608, 656
n.20 (9th Cir. 2024) (en banc) (Bea, J., concurring in part),
amended and superseded on denial of reh’g en banc, 101
F.4th 1036, 1085 n.20 (9th Cir. 2024) (Bea, J., concurring in
part); Hittle v. City of Stockton, Cal., 101 F.4th 1000, 1028,
1032 (9th Cir. 2024) (VanDyke, J., dissenting from the denial
                           PETERSEN V. SRFR                            13


of rehearing en banc). For this reason, the parties spend
much of their briefing citing district court cases. 4
    It is sufficient for us to state at this point that Groff raised
the bar that defendants must clear to show undue hardship
but left us to consider a range of factors that we might deem
relevant.
B. Undue Hardship and Reasonable Accommodation in
   This Case
    With Groff in mind, we consider whether SRFR would
have faced an undue hardship by accommodating Plaintiffs’
request for vaccine exemption. See 600 U.S. at 468. SRFR
identifies several different kinds of costs it would have faced
had it allowed firefighters to work unvaccinated. For our
purposes, we will group them into three categories: (1)
health and safety costs, (2) operational burdens, and (3)
financial burdens.
    1. Health and safety costs
    SRFR argues that it faced increased health and safety
costs by allowing firefighters to work unvaccinated.
Plaintiffs think these health and safety costs are overstated.
SRFR was concerned with the health of two distinct
populations: its own employees and the public, including

4
  Plaintiffs have directed us to Bacon v. Woodward, 104 F.4th 744 (9th
Cir. 2024). We do not think that case aids our analysis here. In Bacon,
Spokane firefighters brought an as-applied Free Exercise Clause
challenge to the city’s implementation of the Proclamation. Id. at 754.
We concluded that those plaintiff-firefighters had adequately pleaded
that the city’s policy was “fatally underinclusive” and, therefore, not
narrowly tailored. Id. at 753. The plaintiffs in that case did not bring a
Title VII claim, and the case does not even cite Groff. See id. at 747
(indicating that the district court’s reference to Title VII was the wrong
standard for a First Amendment claim).
14                       PETERSEN V. SRFR


vulnerable patients, that it serves. The declaration of Fire
Chief O’Brien provided some context for SRFR’s concerns.
Chief O’Brien stated that, as of 2021 when the vaccine
mandate went into effect, SRFR employed 248 persons, of
which 192 were firefighters. All the Plaintiffs were
firefighters or paramedics of some kind, and all were
required to maintain a current Washington State certification
as an EMT or paramedic. Chief O’Brien stated that in 2021,
SRFR responded to 18,000 emergency calls, 85% of which
were calls for emergency medical services. During that year,
SRFR transported 6,866 persons to area hospitals.
    At summary judgment, SRFR relied on the extensive
declaration of Dr. John Lynch to explain its concerns for its
employees and the public it served. Dr. Lynch is a board-
certified physician in infectious disease, Professor of
Medicine at the University of Washington School of
Medicine, and Associate Medical Director at Harborview
Medical Center. Among other things, Dr. Lynch led the
University’s COVID response, including the medical
school’s decision to require COVID-19 vaccinations for its
clinical employees.     His testimony is unrebutted by
Plaintiffs. 5
    Dr. Lynch opined that COVID vaccination is the best
way to slow the spread of COVID and prevent serious illness
or death. He explained that “being fully vaccinated provides
better protection [from reinfection] as compared to having
recovered from COVID.” Further, he opined that “[p]eople
who would rather contract COVID-19 to get infection-

5
 The district Court concluded that “Dr. Lynch is qualified as an expert
on infectious diseases generally and COVID-19 specifically.” Plaintiffs
do not contest Dr. Lynch’s qualifications; on appeal, they refer to Dr.
Lynch as an “infectious disease[] expert.”
                       PETERSEN V. SRFR                      15


mediated immunity rather than simply get vaccinated are
taking a significant risk of severe illness, longer-term serious
health problems . . ., and death, even if they have recovered”
from COVID, and “also risk infecting others . . . with whom
they come in contact.” Dr. Lynch added context for the
timing of the Proclamation’s vaccination mandate in the
latter part of 2021: During that time, “cases were spiking
due to the Delta variant despite other strategies in place.
This was followed by the Omicron waves, which continued
. . . into 2022.”
    Dr. Lynch reviewed “the risks of COVID-19 spreading
throughout fire stations.” He wrote that “[o]utbreaks among
firefighting teams would lead to potentially severe limits on
EMS and firefighting responses in the community.” He
concluded that “[b]ased on [his] experience with the layouts
of fire stations and the research literature relevant to this
environment, none of [the suggested mitigation measures]
could have been effective non-pharmaceutical interventions
to prevent the spread of COVID-19.”
    Similarly, Dr. Lynch discussed how unvaccinated
firefighters might endanger the public when they “have to
enter public buildings or private residences” and when they
“transport injured or sick persons in their vehicles.” He
observed that Plaintiffs’ proposed mitigation techniques—
“assigning unvaccinated firefighters to the same . . . shifts,
assigning individual bedrooms such that they are only used
by other unvaccinated firefighters . . . , [and] designating
restrooms such that unvaccinated employees use one
restroom”—were “aimed only at transmission in the fire
station and not in work vehicles or as personnel are . . .
interacting with members of the public. . . . None of these
suggestions would have reduced the chances of bringing an
16                    PETERSEN V. SRFR


infected firefighter into proximity to an often higher-risk
patient population.”
    Dr. Lynch explained in some detail why Plaintiffs’
proposed accommodation—testing, masking, and social
distancing in lieu of vaccination— was inadequate. Regular
COVID-19 testing was “not sufficient” because tests are not
always accurate and unvaccinated people subject to testing
were “among positive cases that . . . caused outbreaks in”
Washington. Dr. Lynch described PPE, like masks, as
“complements, not substitutes, for getting vaccinated,” since
“[m]asks shore up protection on the outside,” and vaccines
do so on the “inside.” According to Dr. Lynch, vaccines are
“effective around the clock,” and masks are not because “a
work-based masking requirement applies only while
employees are at work.” He cited various studies that
supported these conclusions. Dr. Lynch disagreed with
Plaintiffs’ contention that social distancing served as an
adequate alternative to vaccination because even if
firefighters could socially distance in the fire station, they
could not do so in work vehicles or in public. For Dr. Lynch,
“vaccination was and is the single best tool available for
stemming the spread of COVID-19 . . . , especially when
used in combination with other mitigations.”
    Even if Plaintiffs’ proposed alternatives would have been
sufficient, the evidence submitted by Plaintiffs and SRFR
showed that Plaintiffs did not always wear masks or social
distance. Although Plaintiffs submitted affidavits that stated
that firefighters were always masked when in fire engines
and always social distanced in the fire station, such evidence
was anecdotal and contradicted by other evidence in the
record. One Plaintiff, for example, admitted that firefighters
did not wear masks when sleeping, eating, and drinking at
the firehouse, and another admitted that firefighters did not
                       PETERSEN V. SRFR                     17


wear masks at all times. Chief O’Brien also stated in his
deposition that there were “a lot” of times he saw firefighters
without masks.
    Plaintiffs fail to provide any evidence that their proposed
accommodation would have been a reasonable alternative to
vaccination. Although Plaintiffs’ declarations state they
were “able to safely perform [their] job” and “never
transmitted [COVID] to another employee, co-worker, or
patient, or member of the public,” these general assertions
are unsupported by any medical evidence and would be
impossible to prove at trial.
    Groff tells us that we may look to EEOC guidance to help
determine if these health and safety costs would have
imposed an undue hardship on SRFR. See 600 U.S. at 471
(“[A] good deal of the EEOC’s guidance in this area is
sensible . . . .”). The EEOC has said that when considering
undue hardship in the context of COVID, employers should
consider if the employee “works in a solitary or group work
setting,” “has close contact with other employees or
members of the public,” and “works outdoors or indoors.”
See What You Should Know About COVID-19 and the ADA,
the Rehabilitation Act, and Other EEO Laws, EEOC
(published Mar. 1, 2022), https://www.eeoc.gov/wysk/what-
you-should-know-about-covid-19-and-ada-rehabilitation-
act-and-other-eeo-laws       [https://perma.cc/CQ9C-JPNY].
Each of these considerations weighs in favor of finding
undue hardship here—firefighters work in group settings,
interfacing constantly with coworkers and the public, both
inside and outdoors.
   Allowing unvaccinated firefighters to keep working in
October 2021 would have come at a substantial cost to
SRFR. The objective, unrebutted medical evidence shows
18                     PETERSEN V. SRFR


that SRFR would have faced significant health and safety
costs by allowing unvaccinated firefighters to continue
working, even with accommodations. Those costs would
have affected SRFR’s own workforce and persons in the
public needing emergency, even life-saving, services.
Because firefighters did not (and likely could not) always
mask and social distance, SRFR needed a way to ensure
employee and public safety. Dr. Lynch’s opinion explains
that the vaccine offered the safest, easiest, and most effective
way of doing so.
     2. Operational burdens
    SRFR also argues that it faced a serious operational
burden because forty-six of its 192 firefighters—almost one
quarter of its force—requested an exemption and
accommodation. Plaintiffs argue that because only eleven
firefighters ended up needing accommodation, SRFR
overstates this cost.
    SRFR provided essential EMT and firefighting services
during the pandemic. The cost of accommodating nearly
twenty-five percent of its firefighters is substantial. The fact
that forty-six requests were “initially received” is the critical
data point because after receiving those requests, SRFR had
to make a decision regarding accommodation. And given
the circumstances, there can be no doubt that granting that
many exemptions would have hamstrung SRFR’s
operations. See Groff, 600 U.S. at 476 (Sotomayor, J.,
concurring) (“[F]or many businesses, labor is more
important to the conduct of the business than any other
factor.”).
    There is an additional operational cost to Plaintiffs’
requested accommodation. As we discussed in the prior
section, allowing unvaccinated firefighters to work—even if
                       PETERSEN V. SRFR                      19


they were masked, tested regularly, and maintained social
distancing—put other firefighters at risk. SRFR could not
afford to have substantial numbers of its firefighters on sick
leave. And given the community-critical nature of SRFR’s
mission, this is not a risk that SRFR could assume lightly.
As Dr. Lynch pointed out, any “[o]utbreaks among
firefighting teams would lead to potentially severe limits on
EMS and firefighting responses in the community.”
   3. Financial costs
   Finally, SRFR directs us to the financial costs of
accommodating unvaccinated firefighters, three of which
merit discussion.
    First, SRFR worried about the “increased risk” of
employee absences and the scheduling issues that would
result from those absences. Although Groff mentioned that
temporary labor costs alone do not constitute an undue
hardship, 600 U.S. at 473, firefighter absences or a fire
station COVID outbreak could hamper operations for weeks
at a time. Absenteeism among firefighters not only imposed
real and substantial costs to SRFR, it also threatened real
costs on the community.
    Second, SRFR risked losing a contract to provide
emergency medical services to the Department of
Corrections (DOC) at its Monroe Correctional Complex.
The contract provided almost $400,000 in annual revenue to
SRFR. In September 2021, a month after the Proclamation,
DOC advised SRFR that it would require proof of
vaccination for all on-site contractors and said that “[f]ailure
to provide proof of full vaccination . . . may result in DOC
denying entry.” DOC acknowledged that this policy might
particularly impact “personnel who seek an exemption for a
disability or sincerely held religious belief.” Therefore,
20                     PETERSEN V. SRFR


while DOC was willing to consider accommodations, it
“ha[d] not identified any reasonable accommodations
available for [contractors] whose work must be performed
on-site.”
    Plaintiffs argue that DOC never objected to SRFR’s
unvaccinated firefighters working in its facilities once SRFR
allowed unvaccinated firefighters to return to work in May
2022. Even if this is true, DOC’s policy is not within SRFR’s
control, and at the time SRFR imposed its vaccine mandate,
SRFR had a reasonable concern that it would lose a lucrative
contract. This is a textbook economic hardship. See Lavelle-
Hayden v. Legacy Health, 744 F. Supp. 3d 1135, 1151 (D.
Or. 2024) (“Before Groff, federal courts regularly
considered . . . economic . . . costs when conducting the
undue hardship analysis. . . . Following Groff, district courts
have continued to consider . . . economic . . . costs when
conducting the undue hardship analysis.” (collecting
cases)). The potential loss of a contract with DOC was a cost
that SRFR was entitled to consider.
    Third, SRFR argues that it faced potential liability for
claims brought against it “regarding COVID-19
transmission.” SRFR’s insurance policy excludes “any
liability, defense cost or any other amount incurred by or
accruing directly or indirectly . . . from . . . a Communicable
Disease or the fear or threat . . . of a Communicable
Disease.” In accordance with the policy, the insurer
informed SRFR that “if any patient sued SRFR and alleged
that an unvaccinated employee gave them COVID-19, the
insurance pool would not defend or indemnify SRFR . . . .”
    Plaintiffs argue that this fear is hypothetical and explain
that one Plaintiff spoke to a representative of SRFR’s insurer
who confirmed that it had never faced such a lawsuit. In
                      PETERSEN V. SRFR                      21


general, we consider only actual hardships, not hypothetical
ones when assessing undue hardship. See EEOC v. Townley
Eng’g & Mfg. Co., 859 F.2d 610, 615 (9th Cir. 1988) (“A
claim of undue hardship cannot be supported by merely
conceivable or hypothetical hardships; instead, it must be
supported by proof of actual imposition on coworkers or
disruption of the work routine.” (quotation marks and
citation omitted)). That said, we do not understand “undue
hardship” to mean “realized hardships.” An undue hardship
may include an evaluation of the risk of hardship, not just an
accounting of damages actually suffered. The risk of undue
hardship, however, must be realistic and not “merely
conceivable or hypothetical.” See id. (citation omitted).
When SRFR’s insurer issued a warning about what would or
would not be covered by its “Communicable Disease”
exclusion, SRFR was justified in seriously considering
whether it was prepared to assume the risk of liability.
                            ***
    SRFR has pointed to several substantial costs of
accommodating Plaintiff’s requested vaccine exemption—
the health and safety of its own firefighters and the public,
the large number of firefighters seeking accommodations,
the risk to its operations and the cost of widespread absences,
the potential loss of a lucrative contract with DOC, and the
risk of additional liability. SRFR also provided unrebutted
medical evidence that showed the inadequacy of Plaintiffs’
proposed accommodation. All of this amounts to a showing
that SRFR could not reasonably have accommodated
Plaintiffs without undue hardship in October 2021. See
Groff, 600 U.S. at 469; Peterson, 358 F.3d at 606.
   Plaintiffs, both in their briefing and at oral argument,
urge us to look at this case with the benefit of hindsight.
22                    PETERSEN V. SRFR


They thus express their puzzlement as to why SRFR
mandated the vaccine for a seven-month period (October
2021 to May 2022) after managing the pandemic without
one at other times. Plaintiffs point out that other fire
departments in the area allowed unvaccinated firefighters to
continue working. In one instance, a neighboring fire
department hired Plaintiff David Petersen while he was on
leave from SRFR. He then fought fires alongside his SRFR
peers because of a mutual-aid agreement between the
departments.
    We cannot judge SRFR by the responses taken by other
fire departments. The reasonableness of others’ decisions is
not before us. Nor can we judge SRFR with the clarity of
hindsight or the benefit of post-pandemic debates over what
measured responses frontline employers should have taken.
We must consider the costs faced by SRFR in October 2021,
not today. As Dr. Lynch explained, at the time the Governor
issued the Proclamation, “COVID-19 cases were spiking
due to the Delta variant despite other strategies in place.
This was followed by the Omicron waves, which continued
in this area into 2022.” The pandemic forced the State of
Washington to make decisions quickly and with limited
information. In so doing, SRFR relied on the scientific
evidence and COVID data then available and acted in the
best interests of the community.
    Both sides have cited district court cases involving Title
VII in support of their arguments. Each of these cases
involves a claim of religious exemption from COVID-
related restrictions. Plaintiffs identify three decisions that
they believe support their position here. But each case is
distinguishable because the employers failed to establish that
they could not accommodate their employees without undue
hardship in ways that SRFR did not. See Malone v. Legacy
                      PETERSEN V. SRFR                    23


Health, No. 3:22-cv-1343, 2024 WL 3316167, at *4 (D. Or.
July 5, 2024) (denying summary judgment because the
record lacked “any evidence that Defendant made an
individualized inquiry into whether Plaintiff could be
accommodated”); Floyd v. Trinity Cent. Home Health, LLC,
No. 6:22-cv-6117, 2024 WL 3653055, at *7 (W.D. Ark. Aug.
5, 2024) (denying summary judgment because “the record
[was] devoid of evidence showing that granting an
accommodation would result in substantial increased costs
in relation to Defendant’s business”); Hayslett v. Tyson
Foods, Inc., No. 1:22-cv-1123, 2023 WL 11897503, at *13
(W.D. Tenn. Sept. 20, 2023) (denying summary judgment
because defendants failed to show how accommodating
plaintiffs would come at a substantial cost and because “the
undue burden test is fact-bound and therefore ill-suited for
determination as a matter of law at summary judgment”).
Unlike in those cases, SRFR thoroughly explained the
medical evidence that supported its decision, why Plaintiffs’
proposed accommodation would not be sufficient, and the
other costs it would face if it did not institute a vaccine
mandate. The costs were substantial.
    For its part, SRFR has cited several cases that came to
the same conclusion as we do here. See, e.g., Lavelle-
Hayden, 744 F. Supp. 3d at 1155–59 (finding employer-
healthcare provider would face undue hardship by
accommodating employee-respiratory therapists because
allowing approximately four percent of its employees to
remain unvaccinated would “compromise[] both employee
and patient safety”); Bordeaux v. Lions Gate Ent., Inc., 703
F. Supp. 3d 1117, 1123–25 (C.D. Cal. 2023) (finding
employer-television production company would face undue
hardship by accommodating an actor’s vaccine exemption
request because the actor’s increased risk of contracting
24                     PETERSEN V. SRFR


COVID would pose “logistical problems” that would shut
down the television set and cost the employer at least
$150,000 per day).
    We also note two recent decisions in the First Circuit that
found undue hardship in cases similar to this one. In Melino
v. Boston Medical Center, 127 F.4th 391 (1st Cir. 2025), a
nurse brought a Title VII claim against her employer-
hospital for denying her request to work unvaccinated in the
Cardiac Intensive Care Unit. Id. at 394. The First Circuit
had little difficulty concluding that “permitting Melino to
work unvaccinated would pose an undue hardship by
increasing the risk of COVID-19 transmission amongst staff
and patients,” noting that it was “uncontroverted that [the
hospital] implemented its vaccine requirement based on the
CDC’s recommendations.” Id. at 397 (quotation marks
omitted). Similarly, in Rodrique v. Hearst Communications,
Inc., 126 F.4th 85 (1st Cir. 2025), the court found that a
television station would have faced undue hardship by
accommodating an employee’s COVID vaccination
exemption request in part because the employer “relied on
the objective, scientific information available,” and “no
medical evidence in the summary judgment record
contradict[ed] [the television station’s] conclusion that
vaccinated people are less likely to infect others.” Id. at 91,
93 (citations and quotation marks omitted); cf. Smith v. City
of Atlantic City, 138 F.4th 759, 775 (3d Cir. 2025) (finding
that the employer-fire department would not face
unreasonable hardship in accommodating a single, non-
firefighting employee’s request for exemption from a
regulation requiring he not have a beard in order to properly
wear a breathing mask because there was only “a
vanishingly small risk that [he would] be called in to engage
                      PETERSEN V. SRFR                     25


in the sort of firefighting activities for which [a breathing
mask] is required”).
     For reasons explained, we conclude that SRFR could not
“reasonably       accommodate”       Plaintiffs’    proposed
accommodation “without undue hardship on the conduct of”
its business. 42 U.S.C. § 2000e(j). The district court did not
err in granting SRFR’s summary judgment motion and
denying Plaintiffs’ motion.
                   IV. CONCLUSION
   We AFFIRM the district court’s grant of SRFR’s
motion for summary judgment and its denial of Plaintiffs’
motion for summary judgment.
   AFFIRMED.