United States Court of Appeals
                     For the First Circuit


No. 25-1360

                 EDERVALDO RODRIGUES DA SILVA,

                     Petitioner, Appellee,

                               v.

                   JESSICA SILVEIRA DA SILVA,

                     Respondent, Appellant.


          APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
               FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

        [Hon. Allison D. Burroughs, U.S. District Judge]


                             Before

                     Barron, Chief Judge,
               Gelpí and Aframe, Circuit Judges.


     Lea Gulotta James, with whom Beth I.Z. Boland, Amani Kmeid,
Ruben J. Rodrigues, and Foley & Lardner LLP were on brief, for
appellant.

     Charles R. Hunsinger, with whom Elizabeth G. Crowley and
Bowditch & Dewey LLP were on brief, for appellee.


                         June 30, 2025
             GELPÍ, Circuit Judge.         Approximately two years after

Respondent-Appellant         Jessica    Silveira     da   Silva   ("Silveira")

brought her minor son ("A.R.") to the United States, A.R.'s father,

Petitioner-Appellee Edervaldo Rodrigues da Silva ("Rodrigues"),

initiated proceedings in federal court to return A.R. to Brazil

under the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International

Child Abduction ("Hague Convention").             After Rodrigues proved that

A.R.   had   been   wrongfully    removed,     Silveira    invoked   the   "now

settled" defense under the Hague Convention, asserting that A.R.'s

extensive ties to the community in Lowell, Massachusetts, weighed

against returning him to Brazil.           The district court disagreed.

             On   appeal,    Silveira    argues    that   the   district   court

committed both legal and factual errors, which mandate reversal.

The district court engaged in a thorough analysis and "grapple[d]

with difficult factual circumstances in which no outcome may [have]

appear[ed] ideal."          Mendez v. May, 778 F.3d 337, 347 (1st Cir.

2015).    Ultimately, we hold that it erred in concluding that A.R.

is not settled in the United States.              Accordingly, we vacate and

remand.

                            I. THE HAGUE CONVENTION

             The Hague Convention generally "aims to deter parents

from abducting their children to a country whose courts might side




                                       - 2 -
with them in a custody battle."1       Díaz-Alarcón v. Flández-Marcel,

944 F.3d 303, 305 (1st Cir. 2019).         As implemented in the United

States     by    the   International   Child   Abduction   Remedies   Act

("ICARA"), see 22 U.S.C. §§ 9001-11, the Hague Convention allows

a parent to, among other things, "petition a federal or state court

to return an abducted child to the child's country of habitual

residence," Díaz-Alarcón, 944 F.3d at 305; see also 22 U.S.C.

§ 9003(b).       But that petition does not grant a court carte blanche

to preside over a custody battle.       Rather, it permits the court to

determine "whether a custody decision should be made in the United

States or in the country of the child's habitual residence."

Avendano v. Balza, 985 F.3d 8, 11 (1st Cir. 2021).

            To prevail on the petition, "the party seeking relief

must establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the abductor

'wrongfully removed or retained [the child] within the meaning of

the [Hague] Convention.'"        Díaz-Alarcón, 944 F.3d at 305 (first

alteration in original) (quoting 22 U.S.C. § 9003(e)(1)).         If the

petitioner does so, the Hague Convention's "strong presumption in

favor of returning [the] wrongfully removed or retained child"

applies.        Id. (quoting Darín v. Olivero-Huffman, 746 F.3d 1, 8


     1 The Hague Convention counts among its signatories over one
hundred countries, including the United States and Brazil. See
HCCH, 28: Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of
International Child Abduction (last updated Nov. 14, 2022),
https://www.hcch.net/en/instruments/conventions/status-
table/?cid=24 [https://perma.cc/HJ29-6Y68].


                                   - 3 -
(1st    Cir.     2014)).       That     presumption,     however,   is    not

insurmountable: the respondent may overcome it by proving one of

the    Hague    Convention's    few,    narrowly    construed   affirmative

defenses.      See Avendano, 985 F.3d at 11; see also da Silva v. de

Aredes, 953 F.3d 67, 72-73 (1st Cir. 2020) ("The affirmative

defenses to this presumption are construed narrowly.").

            Relevant to this appeal is the "now settled" defense.

See da Costa v. de Lima, 94 F.4th 174, 179 (1st Cir. 2024).               If

invoked, the defense allows a district court to decline to order

the return of a child if the respondent proves by a preponderance

of the evidence that (a) "the petition for return has been filed

one year or more after the wrongful removal" and (b) "the child is

now settled in the new country."          da Silva, 953 F.3d at 75.      That

is not all.       Even if the respondent clears that hurdle, the

district court still "retains discretion to order the return of

the child."     da Costa, 94 F.4th at 180.      There exists "very little

law providing guidance" to district courts on how to exercise that

"equitable discretion" at that final stage.            Id. (quoting Yaman v.

Yaman, 730 F.3d 1, 21 (1st Cir. 2013)).            And so, we have said, a

district court can "consider the abducting parent's misconduct,

together with any other relevant circumstances, such as whether

return would not be harmful or disruptive even though the child

has become settled, in deciding whether to order [the child's]

return."    Id. (quoting Yaman, 730 F.3d at 21).


                                      - 4 -
                                    II. BACKGROUND

                 With that legal framework in mind, we turn to the travel

of this case.         On March 28, 2022, Silveira and A.R. left Brazil.

By April 3, 2022, they had crossed the southern border into the

United States.            They then made their way to Massachusetts.     Just

over       two    years    later,   Rodrigues   (A.R.'s   biological   father)

initiated proceedings against Silveira and Silveira's now-husband

(A.R.'s now-stepfather), Gilberto Lucas ("Lucas"),2 seeking the

child's return to Brazil under the Hague Convention and ICARA.

The district court held a three-day bench trial in October 2024,

during which it heard testimony from several witnesses, including

Silveira.         We derive the following facts from the testimonial and

documentary evidence introduced at trial.

                               A. Factual Background3

                   1. Rodrigues and Silveira's Relationship

                 Rodrigues and Silveira -- both citizens and natives of

Brazil -- married on May 13, 2011.              They settled in the city of




       The district court granted Silveira's motion to dismiss
       2

Lucas as a respondent during the bench trial.
       In considering whether the district court erred in finding
       3

that A.R. is not settled, "we accept the district court's findings
of fact unless they are clearly erroneous, keeping in mind that
the district judge had the opportunity to assess the credibility
of the witnesses." Janeiro v. Urological Surgery Pro. Ass'n., 457
F.3d 130, 138 (1st Cir. 2006).


                                        - 5 -
Belo Horizonte, Brazil.             About three years into their marriage,

they had A.R.

              The couple separated in 2016.             Although they did not

legally divorce, the couple lived separate lives.4 Rodrigues moved

to his mother's home in a nearby town.                  Silveira, who remained

A.R.'s primary caretaker, eventually moved in with her mother,

too.       During that time, Rodrigues visited A.R. about two weekends

per month.

              At   some    point    in   2021,     Silveira    began    a   romantic

relationship       with    Lucas.        Shortly    after     their    relationship

started, Lucas immigrated to the United States.                 Silveira remained

in Brazil, and she and Rodrigues legally divorced on December 10,

2021.       The terms of their divorce dictated that the couple would

share custody of A.R., but A.R. would continue to live with

Silveira.

                          2. A.R.'s Removal from Brazil

              In   the     months     following     their     divorce,      Silveira

expressed to Rodrigues her desire to travel to the United States.

Rodrigues admits as much, but he disputes whether Silveira told

him she intended to permanently reside with A.R. in the United




       Silveira claims that she separated from Rodrigues because
       4

of domestic issues, including domestic abuse. Rodrigues denies
the allegations of domestic abuse, instead claiming that
infidelity caused their separation.


                                         - 6 -
States.    So, Rodrigues signed a passport application that included

a travel authorization permitting A.R. to travel outside of Brazil.

            Eventually, Rodrigues grew "suspicious" that Silveira

was planning to leave Brazil with A.R.    Rodrigues, in turn, sought

to cancel A.R.'s passport around March 17, 2022.     But his attempt

failed, and Silveira and A.R. left Brazil around March 28, 2022.

Silveira and A.R. first flew to Colombia and then Mexico, where

they crossed the Mexico-United States border on April 3, 2022.

Silveira has since applied for asylum in the United States.

            Meanwhile, unaware that Silveira and his son had already

left Brazil, Rodrigues filed a report with the Brazilian police on

March 30, 2022, expressing his fear that Silveira would unlawfully

take A.R. from Brazil.    He learned from a family member in April

2022 that A.R. had left Brazil.    Rodrigues later confirmed through

social media that Silveira and A.R. were living in Lowell.     For a

time, A.R. and Rodrigues did not communicate regularly.    Now, they

have video calls about three times a week.

              3. Silveira's and A.R.'s Lives in Lowell

            Once in the United States, Silveira and A.R. began living

uninterruptedly with Lucas in Lowell.5     They have lived together

ever since.    Silveira described A.R.'s relationship with Lucas as

"good" and "healthy," and claims that they often spend time



     5   The family has moved residence once within Lowell.


                                - 7 -
together one-on-one and as a family.        Both Silveira and Lucas have

steady jobs and incomes.      Silveira married Lucas on September 18,

2024.

            While Silveira does not have any family in the United

States, Lucas does.6       Silveira and A.R. consistently spend time

with Lucas's family.       Indeed, during Silveira and A.R.'s first

year in Lowell, they lived with Lucas, Lucas's brother, Gilmar

Junior Torres dos Santos ("Torres dos Santos"), and Torres dos

Santos's wife, Bruna Coutinho Suarez dos Santos ("Coutinho").

During that first year, Torres dos Santos would regularly care for

A.R. after school before his mother came home from work, and the

two families would spend quality time together on the weekends.

Torres dos Santos and Coutinho now live nearby in Gloucester,

Massachusetts, but continue to see A.R. twice a month.            A.R. also

spends holidays and other special occasions with Lucas's extended

family.      Torres dos Santos and Coutinho testified that they

consider    A.R.   their   nephew   and   would   be   willing   to   provide

financial assistance to him if he needed it.

         4. A.R.'s Schooling and Extracurricular Participation

            Before moving to the United States, A.R. only received

about a year of schooling, most of it at home, due to the COVID-19


     6 Lucas has an aunt, a brother, a brother-in-law, and several
cousins in Massachusetts. One of Lucas's cousins has a child that
is around A.R.'s age, with whom A.R. plays during family
gatherings.


                                    - 8 -
pandemic.      As a result, A.R. did not learn to read or write in

Portuguese.

              Since arriving in Lowell, A.R. has attended the same

elementary school.           Although A.R. has progressed to the fourth

grade, his first year at school was not without its challenges.

During his first year, he experienced trouble adjusting to his new

classroom      environment       and    meeting    Massachusetts        curriculum

standards.       In particular, record evidence indicates that A.R.

often got distracted, exhibited disruptive behavior, and disturbed

his classmates' learning.         He struggled academically, too, and his

inability to communicate well in English hampered his learning.

              But A.R. showed marked improvement in third grade, his

second    year   of    school    in    the    United   States.     Despite    some

attendance-related           issues,    his     in-class     conduct,     academic

performance, and English-language skills all improved.                   In fact,

A.R.'s third-grade teacher, Sarah Hoey, testified that he "ha[d]

grown    in   many    ways    during   the    school   year"     and   had   "me[t]

expectations of the classroom" by the middle of the school year.

She also said that his overall English skills improved such that

he became an "interpreter" for other Brazilian peers struggling to

understand English.

              Outside of school, A.R. engages with other children,

including at soccer practice and in church.                By the time of trial,

A.R. had been on a soccer team -- practicing soccer twice a week -


                                        - 9 -
- for about three months.        He also regularly attends church and,

while    there,   participates   in   a   youth   group.        Lowell   has   a

significant Brazilian community, and Silveira testified that A.R.

has about five Brazilian friends.

                     B. District Court's Decision

            After the bench trial, the district court issued its

findings of fact and conclusions of law.            To begin, it held that

Rodrigues had met his prima facie burden to show that A.R. was

wrongfully    removed   from   Brazil.      Then,    it    considered -- and

rejected -- the     three   exceptions      Silveira      had    raised:   the

"consent[]" exception, the "now settled" exception, and the "grave

risk" exception.      Because Silveira challenges only the district

court's analysis of the "now settled" exception, we limit our

discussion to that which is pertinent to resolving this appeal.

            The district court started the relevant analysis by

concluding that the proceeding had commenced more than a year after

A.R.'s removal from Brazil.7          Then, after turning to the "now

settled" discussion, the district court identified seven factors

it would consider in deciding whether A.R. was settled: (1) A.R.'s

age, (2) "the stability and duration of [A.R.'s] residence in the

new environment"; (3) whether A.R. consistently attended school;

(4) "whether [A.R.] ha[d] friends and relatives in the new area";



     7   Neither party challenges that determination on appeal.


                                  - 10 -
(5) A.R.'s involvement in the community and in extracurricular

activities, "such as team sports, youth groups, or school clubs";

(6) Silveira's        "employment      and     financial     stability";       and

(7) Silveira's        and    A.R.'s   immigration      statuses.         (Citation

omitted.)    It noted, too, that courts sometimes "consider the

amount of time [the] child has spent in the country, as well as

[his] academic performance, social networks and relationships,

and, under some circumstances, country of citizenship."                  (Citation

omitted.)

            Having identified those factors, the district court then

proceeded to apply the facts.           It started with A.R.'s age.            And

because A.R. was nearly eight years old when he came to the United

States and had lived here for more than two years, the court

reasoned that the first factor "weigh[ed] in Respondent's favor."

            As   to    the   second   factor -- the      stability    of    A.R.'s

residence -- the        district      court     held     that    it   "overall,

disfavor[ed] Respondent's defense or [was], at best, neutral."

The   district    court      acknowledged      that    certain   facts     favored

Silveira.    For instance, it stated that A.R. had only moved homes

one time during his two years in the United States.                Likewise, the

district court pointed out that A.R. "ha[d] consistently lived

with Respondent and [Lucas], and occasionally with other extended

family as well."       And, the court said, A.R. had "attended the same

elementary school since arriving in the United States."                      Those


                                      - 11 -
were    facts,   the     district   court    explained,      that    "play[ed]    a

significant role in the 'settled' inquiry."               (Citation omitted.)

            Despite those favorable findings, the district court

observed    that    A.R.   had   not    demonstrated       "strong    family   and

community ties in the United States."             Specifically, the district

court stated:

            On the one hand, [Coutinho] and [Torres dos
            Santos] credibly testified that they care
            deeply for A.R. and that, after living
            together for nearly a year, they continue to
            see A.R. about twice a month. A.R.'s extended
            family, all of whom have been introduced to
            him through [Lucas], also gather for holidays
            and other special occasions.    On the other
            hand, the Court [could] not ignore that A.R.
            did not know his extended family until he
            traveled to the United States and that these
            relationships are relatively new.    He might
            have spent the past two years with extended
            family here, but he has also spent the first
            eight years of his life with his father and
            other        extended        family        in
            Brazil . . . . Further, although Respondent
            testified that A.R. has friends in his
            neighborhood and school, "the record lacks
            information regarding the number or qualities
            of those relationships." (Citation omitted.)

According   to     the   district   court,      those    "facts    call[ed]    into

question whether A.R. [wa]s settled within the meaning of the

Convention."

            Continuing its review of the factors, the district court

moved to the third factor -- "A.R.'s school attendance and life at

[his]    [e]lementary       [s]chool."          The     district     court    cited

conflicting evidence and testimony.              It assessed some of A.R.'s


                                       - 12 -
attendance-related issues.     It explained that A.R. had "missed a

non-trivial number of school days in his first two years": ten

days the first year and nineteen days the second year.       The court

acknowledged that A.R.'s attendance "may [have been] improving"

but still "weigh[ed]" the absences "negatively."        Similarly, the

court weighed conflicting evidence regarding A.R.'s performance

and behavior in the classroom. Although it recognized the evidence

of   A.R.'s   improving    academic      performance,   behavior,   and

English-speaking skills, the court ultimately concluded that the

third factor "indicate[d] that [A.R.] struggles to adapt to his

new environment."   The court relied on A.R.'s disruptive behavior

in class, his report card that showed "perform[ance] below the

curriculum standards," and Silveira's testimony that A.R. did not

communicate well in English.

          Turning to the fourth factor -- whether A.R. has friends

and relatives in the new area -- the court found that it did not

"fully support[] Respondent's contention that [A.R. was] settled."

The court doubted "the strength of A.R.'s relationship with his

relatives in the United States,"         inferred that A.R. and     his

stepfather were not "particularly close," and again cited its lack

of knowledge about the quality of A.R.'s relationships beyond his

extended family members.

          The district court held that the fifth factor -- A.R.'s

community involvement and extracurricular activities -- did "not


                                - 13 -
weigh in Respondent's favor" either.     Despite acknowledging A.R.'s

biweekly church attendance and his three months of participation

on a soccer team, the court reasoned "that for the majority of his

time in the United States, [A.R.] did not participate in any

significant after-school activities."

            The court did, however, decide that the sixth factor -

- A.R.'s financial stability -- supported a finding that he is

settled.    It pointed to Silveira's and Lucas's steady employment

and income to support that conclusion.

            Finally, the court briefly considered Silveira's and

A.R.'s immigration statuses.    After determining that there existed

"no apparent immediate threat of deportation," the district court

did not weigh that factor against Respondent.

            Considering the foregoing factors, the district court

admitted that "[t]his was a close call and a difficult decision"

but ultimately held that Silveira had not carried her burden of

demonstrating that A.R. is settled. As a result, the court ordered

Silveira to make arrangements to return A.R. to Brazil.     Silveira

filed this appeal shortly after moving to stay the order of return.8

                       III. ARGUMENTS ON APPEAL

            Silveira raises two main arguments on appeal.     First,

she claims that the district court misapplied the legal standard


     8   The district court stayed the order of return until July 1,
2025.


                                - 14 -
by engaging in a comparative analysis. That is, the district court

allegedly compared A.R.'s life in the United States to his life in

Brazil when determining if he was "now settled."                Second, she

argues that the district court clearly erred in its weighing of

the evidence and its ultimate conclusion that A.R. was not "now

settled."    Because we agree with the second point, we need not

address Silveira's first argument.

                        IV. STANDARDS OF REVIEW

            Before   reaching    the    merits,   we   must   determine   our

standard of appellate review.          Following a bench trial, we review

de novo a district court's legal conclusions.           da Costa, 94 F.4th

at 180.   In Hague Convention cases, that means we view with fresh

eyes the district court's interpretation of said convention.              See

Yaman, 730 F.3d at 10.          We do the same when a district court

applies "the [Hague] Convention to facts."              Id.    We, however,

examine the trial court's findings of fact under the deferential

clear error standard.      See Fed. R. Civ. P. 52(a)(6).            Thus we

overturn factual determinations only if, "on the whole of the

record[,] we are 'left with the definite and firm conviction that

a mistake has been committed.'"        da Costa, 94 F.4th at 181 (quoting

ST Eng'g Marine, Ltd. v. Thompson, MacColl & Bass, LLC, 88 F.4th

27, 32 (1st Cir. 2023)).

            As to the "now settled" determination, we have broken

down our review into two distinct questions.           First, a legal one:


                                  - 15 -
"'What is the appropriate standard' to ascertain whether a child

is now settled?"        da Costa, 94 F.4th at 181 (quoting Monasky, 589

U.S. at 84).     And second, "[o]nce the [district] court correctly

identifies the governing totality-of-the-circumstances standard,"

a factual question remains: "'[Has] the child' become settled in

his new environment?"            Id. (second and third alterations in

original) (quoting Monasky, 589 U.S. at 84).                We review the former

de novo and the latter for clear error.               Id.

                                  V. DISCUSSION

            We   next    turn    to   the   merits.         First,   we   begin   by

clarifying the proper standard through which we evaluate the

evidence.    Second, we hold that the evidence, viewed through a

holistic lens, compels the conclusion that A.R. is "now settled"

in the United States.

                        A. The "Now Settled" Standard

            The district court must consider the totality of the

circumstances when determining whether a child is settled.                        da

Costa, 94 F.4th at 180.         In conducting that task, a district "court

may consider any relevant fact," including:

            (1) the child's age; (2) the stability and
            duration of the child's residence in the new
            environment; (3) whether the child attends
            school or day care consistently; (4) whether
            the child has friends and relatives in the new
            area;   (5) the   child's   participation   in
            community     or    extracurricular     school
            activities, such as team sports, youth groups,



                                      - 16 -
            or school clubs; and (6) the respondent's
            employment and financial stability.

Id. (quoting In re B. Del C.S.B., 559 F.3d 999, 1009 (9th Cir.

2009)).    Immigration status may be relevant, too.                 Id.

            But    our   exposition    of     potentially      relevant    factors

should not be construed as having created a rigid balancing test

composed of seven binary factors.              To be clear, the factors are

neither mandatory nor exhaustive.              See Alcala v. Hernandez, 826

F.3d 161, 171 (4th Cir. 2016) ("[S]uch factors are non-exhaustive,

and in a particular case some of these considerations may not apply

and additional considerations may be relevant.").                   After all, each

case is different, and the relevance of -- and weight attributed

to -- certain      factors    "will    vary    based    on    the    idiosyncratic

circumstances of each particular case."                da Costa, 94 F.4th at

180.

            Instead, a district court should view the seven factors

above as "relevant data point[s]" that may guide its inquiry.                  Id.

And the factors' use "in guiding factual development" must not

"obscure the [court's] ultimate purpose": to make a holistic

determination about whether the "child has significant connections

demonstrating a secure, stable, and permanent life in his or her

new environment."        Alcala, 826 F.3d at 171.            In other words, the

district court may use the factors to develop the record, and after

doing     so,     it   must   decide    whether        the    constellation     of



                                      - 17 -
facts -- viewed in the aggregate -- paints the picture of a child

who is settled in the United States.

                 B. Applying the Facts to the Standard

             With that understanding in mind, we turn to the facts of

this case.    Silveira contends that the constellation of facts here

compels the conclusion that A.R. is "now settled."         We agree.   When

we consider the facts in the record, viewed as a whole, we are

left with the firm conviction that A.R. is a settled child.

             Consider, for starters, A.R.'s age and the stability of

his residence in the United States.         At the time of trial, A.R.

was ten years old, and since his arrival, he has lived in Lowell,

only moving once within the same school district.         That means that

A.R. has lived in the same community for nearly three years, a

significant amount of time in the life of a school-age child.

During   that    time,   A.R.   has   benefitted   from   a   stable   home

environment with his mother and stepfather.          Silveira is a good

mother to A.R., and A.R. has a "good" and "healthy" relationship

with his stepfather. Moreover, both Silveira and Lucas have steady

employment and income which allows them to meet A.R.'s needs.

Those facts, standing alone, weigh heavily in favor of finding

A.R. to be "now settled."

             To be sure, we do not suggest that those facts are

dispositive.    Rather, they are mere data points.        See da Costa, 94

F.4th at 180; cf. da Silva, 953 F.3d at 76 (affirming a not-settled


                                  - 18 -
finding for a child who had lived in and attended public school in

Boston for three years because, among other things, the respondent

struggled to find steady employment and the child was diagnosed

with "adjustment disorder with depression or anxiety").

           That is not all there is.          A.R. has also benefitted from

a supportive and involved extended family.           He has a step-aunt and

step-uncle who live nearby and who he is intimately familiar with.

The couple lived with A.R. for about a year, during which they

spent quality time with and cared for him.               Despite having moved

out,   A.R.'s    step-uncle    and   step-aunt    remain     close     with   him,

continuing to see him twice a month.             Both testified that they

consider A.R. their nephew and would be willing to support him

financially if necessary.          What is more, A.R. regularly gathers

with   Lucas's   extended     family   for    holidays    and    other   special

occasions.

           In    addition     to   stability    at   home,      A.R.   has    been

consistently integrating into the community.              Consider first his

experience at school. For well over two years, he has consistently

attended the same elementary school.              True, he exhibited some

growing pains adjusting to an in-person school environment in the

United States.    But, for one thing, that is not surprising.             Recall

A.R.'s educational starting point. He arrived in the United States

having been mostly home-schooled in Brazil and unable to read or

write in Portuguese, let alone in English.           By the middle of third


                                     - 19 -
grade, though, his teacher testified that A.R. "ha[d] grown in

many ways" and "was meeting expectations of the classroom."       His

progress was such that he became "an interpreter of sorts" for

other Brazilian students in his class.       Despite some ongoing

challenges, A.R. has consistently progressed grade levels and is

currently in fourth grade.    It is unlikely that such improvement

could be made over a fairly short period of time by a child who

has not become settled.    See Alcala, 826 F.3d at 172.

           His activities in the community further support the view

that A.R. is settled.     Living in the same community has allowed

A.R. to participate in activities with other children in and

outside of school.      In particular, A.R. and his family attend

church together twice a month, where A.R. participates in a youth

group.   A.R. has several friends, too, including many of Brazilian

descent.   And, three months before the trial, A.R. joined a local

soccer team with which he practices twice a week.9        These facts

depict a child who has established a solid foundation in his family

and home environment and is gradually, but surely, expanding his

horizons. That he did not participate in these activities earlier,

and did not participate in more of them at the time of trial, does




     9 Although at the time of trial A.R. had only played on the
soccer team for three months, "the [Hague] Convention itself gives
a   strong   indication  that   post-petition   evidence   remains
important." da Costa, 94 F.4th at 182.


                               - 20 -
not make him unusual for a ten-year-old, especially one in an

immigrant family of relatively modest means.

           Taken together, these facts, and the record as a whole,

compel the conclusion that A.R. is "now settled" in the United

States.    See da Costa, 94 F.4th at 181.               We are aware of no

appellate decision in which a child was deemed not to be settled

where the child has lived in the same city for several years with

a loving, financially stable immediate family; has only moved once,

and has never changed schools; has become acclimated to his school

environment to a sufficient extent to make substantial educational

progress; has an extended step-family nearby who cares for him and

whom he sees frequently; and is participating in various community

activities of a sort and to an extent typical for a child of his

age.10     Cf.   Alcala,   826     F.3d   at   172-74   (reviewing     settled

determination de novo and finding child to be settled where child

thrived in school and was supported by a network of family and

friends,   despite   having   an    unstable    home    environment,    moving

households and changing schools three times in two years, and being

absent from school a non-trivial number of days); Broca v. Giron,

530 F. App'x 46, 47-48 (2d Cir. 2013) (summary order) (reviewing

de novo and finding child to be settled because of his "consistent

school attendance, involvement in church, and strong relationships


     10
        The parties have not cited such a case and, at oral argument,
counsel for the petitioner was unable to provide one.


                                    - 21 -
with friends and relatives in the area, in particular his mother

and sister," despite his uncertain "immigration status, lack of

residential stability," "poor performance in school," and "his

mother's lack of financial stability"); Lomanto v. Agbelusi, No.

23-993, 2024 WL 3342415, at *2 (2d Cir. July 9, 2024) (reviewing

de novo and finding children settled where, despite their living

in   a   shelter    and   having   unsettled   immigration         status,   they

regularly attended school, were involved in church, and had strong

relationships with friends and relatives).

             In concluding otherwise, the district court correctly

identified and considered the seven factors that we have deemed

relevant to the "now settled" decision.                  That then left the

holistic,      totality-of-the-circumstances            analysis     that     our

precedents require.        See da Costa, 94 F.4th at 181.            Insofar as

the district court undertook that inquiry, it placed emphasis on

certain facts -- such as how frequently A.R. saw his extended

step-family, his record at school, and how long he had been playing

extracurricular soccer.       But it is clear that none of those facts,

when     properly   viewed   in    the   context   of    the   entire   record,

undermines the conclusion that A.R. is settled.

             The bottom line is this.      The district court "grapple[d]

with difficult factual circumstances in which no outcome may [have]

appear[ed] ideal."        Mendez, 778 F.3d at 347.             And, the record

showed that A.R.'s life in the United States has not been without


                                    - 22 -
its challenges.        A "now settled" child, however, need not have a

perfect or flawless life; we ask only if the constellation of facts

shows   a    child   with   "significant    connections      demonstrating    a

secure, stable, and permanent life in his or her new environment."

Alcala, 826 F.3d at 171.        When viewed together, the constellation

of   facts     here -- A.R.'s     age,     home     life,    extended     family

connections, financial stability, consistent school attendance and

improvement,     and    extracurricular     participation -- compels        the

conclusion that A.R. is such a child.             We accordingly vacate.

             But that does not end the matter. For the district court

retains its "equitable jurisdiction" to decide whether to order

A.R.'s return.       da Costa, 94 F.4th at 180 (quoting Yaman, 730 F.3d

at 21).     So, we remand for the district court to decide whether,

in the exercise of that equitable discretion, returning A.R. to

Brazil is warranted despite his status as "now settled."                      In

conducting that narrow task, the district court "may 'consider

[Silveira's]     misconduct,    [if   any,]       together   with   any   other

relevant circumstances, such as whether return would not be harmful

or disruptive even though [A.R.] has become settled.'"                       Id.

(quoting Yaman, 730 F.3d at 21).

                               VI. CONCLUSION

             For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the district

court is vacated and remanded for further proceedings in accordance

with this opinion.       Each party shall bear its own costs.


                                   - 23 -