FOR PUBLICATION

       UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
            FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT


PETER SCHUMAN; WILLIAM                     No. 24-2624,
COPLIN,                                        24-2978
                                             D.C. No.
           Plaintiffs – Appellants /
                                          4:16-cv-05544-
           Cross-Appellees,
                                               HSG

v.

MICROCHIP TECHNOLOGY                         OPINION
INCORPORATED; ATMEL
CORPORATION; ATMEL
CORPORATION UNITED STATES
SEVERANCE GUARANTEE
BENEFIT PROGRAM,

            Defendants – Appellees /
            Cross-Appellants.


       Appeal from the United States District Court
         for the Northern District of California
     Haywood S. Gilliam, Jr., District Judge, Presiding
2                SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.


             Argued and Submitted May 12, 2025
                  San Francisco, California

                       Filed June 5, 2025

Before: Sidney R. Thomas, William A. Fletcher, and Milan
              D. Smith, Jr., Circuit Judges.

             Opinion by Judge Sidney R. Thomas


                          SUMMARY*



                  Release of Claims / ERISA

    The panel reversed the district court’s summary
judgment against Peter Schuman and William Coplin in a
case concerning the enforceability of a release of claims
under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974 (“ERISA”); remanded to the district court for further
proceedings; and dismissed for lack of appellate jurisdiction
a cross-appeal by Microchip Technology Inc., Amtel Corp.,
and Amtel Corp. U.S. Severance Guarantee Benefit Program
(collectively “Defendants”).
    In anticipation of a potential merger, Amtel Corp.
created a benefits plan (“Plan”), governed by ERISA, for
employees to receive severance in the event that an acquiring
company fired Amtel staff. Soon after Microchip acquired


*
 This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
               SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.               3


Amtel, Microchip terminated Schuman and Coplin, without
cause, and offered them significantly lower benefits than
promised in the Plan in exchange for a release of all potential
claims. Schuman and Coplin signed the releases.
    Schuman and Coplin later filed a class-action complaint,
on behalf of about 200 similarly situated former Amtel
employees who had also signed releases, alleging violations
of ERISA, including breach of fiduciary duty and denial of
benefits, and challenging the enforceability of the releases.
    The district court entered final judgment under Federal
Rule of Civil Procedure 54(b) in favor of Defendants and
against Schuman and Coplin, certifying for this court’s
review the question of what legal test should apply in
determining the enforceability of the releases signed by
Schuman and Coplin and the majority of class members.
    The panel held that the district court’s Rule 54(b)
certification was not improper.
    The panel held that courts must consider alleged
improper conduct by the fiduciary in obtaining a release as
part of the totality of the circumstances concerning the
knowledge or voluntariness of the release or waiver. In
evaluating the totality of the circumstances to determine
whether the individual entered into the release or waiver
knowingly and voluntarily, courts should consider the
following non-exhaustive factors: (1) the employee’s
education and business experience; (2) the employee’s input
in negotiating the terms of the settlement; (3) the clarity of
the release language; (4) the amount of time the employee
had for deliberation before signing the release; (5) whether
the employee actually read the release and considered its
terms before signing it; (6) whether the employee knew of
his rights under the plan and the relevant facts when he
4              SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.


signed the release; (7) whether the employee had an
opportunity to consult with an attorney before signing the
release; (8) whether the consideration given in exchange for
the release exceeded the benefits to which the employee was
already entitled by contract or law; and (9) whether the
employee’s release was induced by improper conduct on the
fiduciary’s part. Where, as here, the district court has found
a genuine issue of fact material to the issue of a breach of
fiduciary duty in obtaining the release of claims, the final
factor warrants serious consideration and may weigh
particularly heavily against finding that the release was
“knowing” or “voluntary” or both.
   The panel remanded to the district court for its
application of the factors.
    The panel dismissed for lack of jurisdiction Microchip’s
cross-appeal challenging the district court’s denial of
summary judgment as to the non-named plaintiffs. Pendent
jurisdiction does not apply because the issue raised in the
cross-appeal—whether the judgment against Schuman and
Coplin extinguished the non-named plaintiffs’ claims—is
not inextricably intertwined with the issue properly before
this court on interlocutory appeal.
              SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.            5


                       COUNSEL

Michael Rubin (argued) and Matthew J. Murray, Altshuler
Berzon LLP, San Francisco, California; Keith Ehrman and
Cliff M. Palefsky, McGuinn Hillsman & Palefsky, San
Francisco, California; William B. Reilly, Law Office of
William Reilly, Mill Valley, California; for Plaintiffs-
Appellants.
Mark G. Kisicki (argued), Kristina N. Holmstrom, and
Elizabeth Soveranez, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak &
Stewart PC, Phoenix, Arizona; Sean P. Nalty, Ogletree
Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart PC, San Francisco,
California; Mark E. Schmidtke, Ogletree Deakins Nash
Smoak & Stewart PC, Valparaiso, Indiana; David L.
Schenberg, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart PC, St.
Louis, Missouri; for Defendants-Appellees.



                        OPINION

S.R. THOMAS, Circuit Judge:

    In this appeal, we consider what legal test courts must
apply to evaluate the enforceability of a release of claims
under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974 (“ERISA”). We hold that courts must decide whether
the employee entered into the release knowingly and
voluntarily by examining the totality of the circumstances,
including enumerated factors. This inquiry requires an
assessment of whether any improper fiduciary conduct, such
as an employer’s breach of an ERISA-imposed fiduciary
6             SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.


duty in the course of obtaining the release, undermines the
validity of the release.
    We have jurisdiction over the appeal pursuant to
28 U.S.C. § 1291 because the district court properly entered
judgment pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 54(b).
As discussed infra, we lack appellate jurisdiction over the
cross-appeal.
    We review the district court’s grant of summary
judgment de novo. King v. Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Ill.,
871 F.3d 730, 739 (9th Cir. 2017). We reverse and remand
for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
                             I
    In anticipation of a potential merger, the technology
company Atmel Corporation created a benefits plan
(“Plan”), governed by ERISA, for employees to receive
severance in the event that an acquiring company fired
Atmel staff. Atmel told employees that the Plan, which
included significant cash severance, was “intended to ease
concerns.”
    The Plan would only pay out benefits if several
conditions were met. First, the Plan would expire “on
November 1, 2015 unless an Initial Triggering Event . . .
ha[d] occurred prior” to that date. The Plan defined an
“Initial Triggering Event” as occurring “only if the Company
enter[ed] into a definitive agreement . . . on or before
November 1, 2015, that [would] result in a Change of
Control of the Company.” If such an event occurred, the
Plan would “remain in effect for” the next eighteen months.
   Second, if the “Initial Triggering Event” occurred by the
deadline, Atmel employees could then receive the benefits
only if two more conditions were met: (A) “[a] Change of
              SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.             7


Control actually occur[red];” and (B) “[t]heir employment
[was] terminated without ‘Cause’ by the Company (or its
successor) at any time within 18 months of the execution
date of the Definitive Agreement.”
    The meaning of the key language in these conditions—
specifically, whether an eventual “Change of Control” had
to involve the same company with which Atmel entered into
a “definitive agreement” on or before the November 1,
2015 deadline—remains in dispute.
    In September 2015, Dialog Semiconductor agreed to
acquire Atmel. But before the merger closed, Microchip
Technology Inc. put in a competing offer. Microchip agreed
in January 2016 to acquire Atmel. Between the Dialog deal
and the announcement of the Microchip agreement, an
Atmel human resources executive assured employees that
the Plan would provide benefits for those “terminated
without Cause in connection with a Change of Control of the
company, including an acquisition by Dialog or Microchip.”
After the Microchip agreement, Atmel’s human resources
department circulated a “Frequently Asked Questions”
document—which evidence suggests Microchip reviewed
and approved—stating that Microchip would honor the
Atmel Plan. Microchip’s merger with Atmel officially
closed in April 2016.
    Soon after the merger, Microchip terminated the named
plaintiffs in this suit, Peter Schuman and William Coplin,
without cause, and offered them significantly lower benefits
than promised in the Plan in exchange for a release of all
potential claims.        Letters to Schuman and Coplin
accompanying the proposed releases stated that Atmel “and
Microchip are making this offer, in part to resolve any
current disagreement or misunderstanding regarding
8                SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.


severance benefits previously offered by [Atmel].”
Microchip informed Atmel employees that the benefits
promised to them under the Plan were not available because
the Plan had expired. Microchip’s stance was that the Plan
had expired because the deal initiated before the deadline,
with Dialog, had not resulted in a finalized merger.
Schuman and Coplin signed the releases.
    Schuman and Coplin later filed a class-action complaint
against Microchip, Atmel Corp., and Atmel Corp. U.S.
Severance Guarantee Benefit Program (collectively,
“Microchip”), on behalf of about 200 similarly situated
former Atmel employees who had also signed releases.1 The
complaint alleged violations of ERISA, including breach of
fiduciary duty and denial of benefits, and challenged the
enforceability of the releases. As stated by the district court,
Schuman and Coplin alleged that Microchip breached its
“fiduciary duties by misinterpreting the [Plan] as having
expired and encouraging Plaintiffs to sign releases in
exchange for reduced severance benefits” because
Microchip allegedly knew or should have known that the
Plan remained valid.2 The district court certified the class,
and Microchip eventually moved for summary judgment.
    Meanwhile, a group of nine former Atmel employees
who had not signed releases also sued Microchip, alleging
similar violations of ERISA. The two suits proceeded on
parallel tracks before the same district judge. In the nine


1
 Discovery revealed that 5 members of the currently certified 220-
member class did not in fact sign the release. The status of those class
members remains unresolved and is not at issue in this appeal.
2
 There is no dispute about Microchip’s status as a fiduciary as relevant
here.
               SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.               9


former employees’ suit, the district court initially found that
the Plan’s key language regarding the “Change of Control”
and “definitive agreement” unambiguously meant that the
Plan had not expired by the time of the Microchip merger,
and that Microchip had breached its fiduciary duties. On
appeal, this Court concluded that the language was
ambiguous, and remanded for further proceedings to resolve
the Plan’s meaning. Berman v. Microchip Tech. Inc., 838 F.
App’x 292, 293 (9th Cir. 2021). The parties in Berman then
settled, leaving the meaning of the Plan’s key language
unresolved.
    After Berman settled, Microchip renewed its summary
judgment motion in Schuman and Coplin’s class action,
which had been stayed pending the expected trial in Berman.
As described by the district court, Microchip “argue[d] that
Plaintiffs knowingly and voluntarily waived their right to
pursue claims under the Atmel Plan,” which should dispose
of the action. Schuman and Coplin argued that even if they
had knowingly and voluntarily signed the releases, the
releases were unenforceable because “Microchip violated its
fiduciary duties by the very act of obtaining releases in
exchange for sharply reduced severance payments” when it
knew or should have known employees were still entitled to
benefits under the Plan, contrary to Microchip’s
misrepresentations.
    The district court granted summary judgment against the
named plaintiffs but denied summary judgment for the non-
named plaintiffs’ claims. Strictly applying a six-part test
from the First and Second Circuits, the district court found
Schuman’s and Coplin’s releases were enforceable and
therefore disposed of their claims. That test asks whether a
10             SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.


release was “knowing and voluntary” in light of the totality
of the circumstances, including:

       (1) plaintiff’s education and business
       sophistication; (2) the respective roles of
       employer and employee in determining the
       provisions of the waiver; (3) the clarity of the
       agreement; (4) the time plaintiff had to study
       the agreement; (5) whether plaintiff had
       independent advice, such as that of counsel;
       and (6) the consideration for the waiver.

Morais v. Cent. Beverage Corp. Union Emps.’ Supplemental
Ret. Plan, 167 F.3d 709, 713 n.6 (1st Cir. 1999) (citing
Rivera-Flores v. Bristol-Myers Squibb Caribbean, 112 F.3d
9, 12 n.4 (1st Cir. 1997)); see also Finz v. Schlesinger,
957 F.2d 78, 82 (2d Cir. 1992).
    The district court analyzed each factor and found that
Schuman and Coplin understood the terms and stakes of the
release and signed it willingly. The district court did not
consider any evidence of Microchip’s alleged breach of
fiduciary duties when analyzing these factors and reviewing
the totality of the circumstances. It thus granted summary
judgment against Schuman and Coplin.
    As for the non-named plaintiffs, the district court found
that the six-factor test was too individualized to support a
class-wide conclusion that all of the releases were signed
knowingly and voluntarily. Because the court had certified
the class based in part on the expectation of evaluating the
releases’ enforceability on a class-wide basis, and the parties
had not briefed the six-factor test at certification, the court
ordered the parties to show cause “why the class should or
should not be decertified.”
               SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.              11


    The court then separately considered the non-named
plaintiffs’ claim that Microchip breached its fiduciary duties
under ERISA because it knew or should have known that the
Plan had not expired. The court denied summary judgment
as to these plaintiffs because there was “at least one material
dispute of fact regarding Defendants’ knowledge of the Plan
and its intended interpretation.”
    Subsequently, the district court entered final judgment
under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 54(b) in favor of
Microchip and against Schuman and Coplin, certifying for
our review the question of “what legal test the Court should
apply in determining the enforceability of the releases signed
by Plaintiffs Peter Schuman and William Coplin and the
majority of class members.” The district court wanted
clarification as to whether it properly adopted and applied
the First and Second Circuit’s six-part test or whether it
should have considered Microchip’s alleged breach of
fiduciary duties as part of its evaluation. The district court
considered this a threshold question, to be answered before
moving ahead with class treatment or decertification. The
court stayed the remainder of the case pending appeal.
    Schuman and Coplin appealed. Microchip cross-
appealed, contending that the district court erred by denying
summary judgment as to the non-named plaintiffs instead of
applying the judgment against Schuman and Coplin to the
rest of the class.
                              II
    The primary question in this appeal is what legal test
determines whether an ERISA release is enforceable.
    We first consider whether ERISA requires heightened
scrutiny of a waiver or release of ERISA claims. In Vizcaino
12             SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.


v. Microsoft Corp., 120 F.3d 1006, 1012 (9th Cir. 1997) (en
banc), we suggested that if a waiver of ERISA claims had
been at issue, we “would have [had] to consider whether” the
waiver “must and would withstand special scrutiny designed
to prevent potential employer or fiduciary abuse,” and that a
waiver would need to be “knowing and voluntary.”
However, it was unnecessary to decide that issue in
Vizcaino. Id. Although we have since considered the
enforceability of ERISA releases, we have not yet
determined what the relationship is between enforceability
and allegations of employer and fiduciary abuse, or whether
releases must indeed withstand “special scrutiny.” See, e.g.,
Washington v. Bert Bell/Pete Rozelle NFL Ret. Plan, 504
F.3d 818, 823–25 (9th Cir. 2007) (assessing an alleged
breach of fiduciary duty, finding no breach, and then
evaluating whether the release was knowing and voluntary).
    In accord with ERISA’s purposes and guided by other
circuits’ approaches, we conclude that, when a breach of
fiduciary duties is alleged, courts must evaluate releases and
waivers of ERISA claims with “special scrutiny designed to
prevent potential employer or fiduciary abuse.” Vizcaino,
120 F.3d at 1012.
    Requiring courts to consider evidence of a breach of
fiduciary duty related to a release of claims under ERISA
aligns with the statute’s purpose, structure, and underlying
trust-law principles. See Tibble v. Edison Int’l, 575 U.S.
523, 528–31 (2015); Varity Corp. v. Howe, 516 U.S. 489,
497 (1996).
    Congress enacted ERISA “to protect . . . the interests of
participants in employee benefit plans . . . by establishing
standards of conduct, responsibility, and obligation for
fiduciaries of employee benefit plans, and by providing for
               SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.               13


appropriate remedies, sanctions, and ready access to the
Federal courts.” 29 U.S.C. § 1001(b). The statute “requires
a fiduciary,” such as an employer, “to discharge its
responsibilities ‘solely in the interest of the participants and
beneficiaries’ and ‘for the exclusive purpose of
. . . providing benefits’” to them. Guenther v. Lockheed
Martin Corp., 972 F.3d 1043, 1051 (9th Cir. 2020) (quoting
29 U.S.C. § 1104(a)(1)).
    The fiduciary duties ERISA imposes are drawn to a
significant degree “from the common law of trusts, the law
that governed most benefit plans before ERISA’s
enactment.” Varity Corp., 516 U.S. at 496. “The duty of
loyalty is one of the common law trust principles that apply
to ERISA fiduciaries,” and includes “a duty to disclose”
accurate and material information and the duty to “deal
fairly.” Washington, 504 F.3d at 823 (cleaned up).
Relatedly, the Supreme Court has held that “[t]o participate
knowingly and significantly in deceiving a plan’s
beneficiaries in order to save the employer money at the
beneficiaries’ expense” breaches the employer’s fiduciary
duty, as doing so “is not to act ‘solely in the interest of the
participants and beneficiaries.’” Varity Corp., 516 U.S. at
506 (quoting 29 U.S.C. § 1104(a)).
    The question, then, is how to apply the required special
scrutiny in practice. Four other circuits have adopted
ERISA-specific tests for the enforceability of releases. See
Morais, 167 F.3d at 713 & n.6 (totality of the circumstances,
including six factors); Finz, 957 F.2d at 82 (substantially the
same test); Howell v. Motorola, Inc., 633 F.3d 552, 559 (7th
Cir. 2011) (substantially the same, but weighing eight
factors, including “improper conduct” by the fiduciary);
Leavitt v. Nw. Bell Tel. Co., 921 F.2d 160, 162 (8th Cir.
1990) (substantially the same, but weighing nine factors,
14                SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.


including “improper conduct” by fiduciary and employee’s
awareness of rights). In doing so, our sister circuits have
recognized that “[b]ecause we are guided by principles of
trust law . . . we must examine the totality of the
circumstances in which the release was signed to ensure the
fiduciary did not obtain the release in violation of its duties
to the beneficiary.” Leavitt, 921 F.2d at 162.
    We accordingly conclude that courts must consider
alleged improper conduct by the fiduciary in obtaining a
release as part of the totality of the circumstances concerning
the knowledge or voluntariness of the release or waiver.
    In assessing the totality of the circumstances, our sister
circuits have employed slightly different tests. In contrast to
the First and Second Circuit’s non-exhaustive six-part test,
the Seventh and Eighth Circuits have adopted more
comprehensive but still non-exhaustive eight- and nine-part
tests. The Seventh and Eighth Circuits’ tests vary slightly in
wording and content, but both explicitly require
consideration of any improper conduct by the fiduciary.3
The approach of the Seventh and Eighth Circuits provides
the right balance between a strictly traditional voluntariness

3
  The approaches differ in three respects: (1) the Eighth Circuit asks
“whether [the employee] was given an opportunity to consult with an
attorney before signing the release,” Leavitt, 921 F.2d at 162, while the
Seventh Circuit asks “whether the employee was represented by counsel
or consulted with an attorney,” Howell, 633 F.3d at 559; (2) the Eighth
Circuit asks whether the employee “received adequate consideration,”
Leavitt, 921 F.2d at 162, while the Seventh Circuit’s inquiry is “whether
the consideration given in exchange for the waiver exceeded the benefits
to which the employee was already entitled by contract or law,” Howell,
633 F.3d at 559; and (3) the Eighth Circuit asks whether the employee
“knew of his rights under the plan and the relevant facts when he signed
the release,” Leavitt, 921 F.2d at 162, while the Seventh Circuit does not.
                 SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.                  15


examination and an ERISA-based analysis. Thus, we join
their approach.4
    Combining the two sets of factors, we hold that, in
evaluating the totality of the circumstances to determine
whether the individual entered into the release or waiver
knowingly and voluntarily, courts should consider the
following non-exhaustive factors: (1) the employee’s
education and business experience; (2) the employee’s input
in negotiating the terms of the settlement; (3) the clarity of
the release language; (4) the amount of time the employee
had for deliberation before signing the release; (5) whether
the employee actually read the release and considered its
terms before signing it; (6) whether the employee knew of
his rights under the plan and the relevant facts when he
signed the release; (7) whether the employee had an
opportunity to consult with an attorney before signing the
release; (8) whether the consideration given in exchange for
the release exceeded the benefits to which the employee was
already entitled by contract or law; and (9) whether the
employee’s release was induced by improper conduct on the
fiduciary’s part.
    Where, as here, the district court has found a genuine
issue of fact material to the issue of a breach of fiduciary
duty in obtaining the release of claims, the final factor
warrants serious consideration and may weigh particularly



4
  Schuman and Coplin urge us to adopt a test that would ask, as a
prerequisite to any consideration of “knowing and voluntary,” whether
the release is unenforceable at the outset because of the fiduciary’s
improper conduct in obtaining it. We decline to adopt that approach,
which no circuit uses.
16             SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.


heavily against finding that the release was “knowing” or
“voluntary” or both.
    Given our formulation of the applicable test, we remand
the question to the district court for its application of the
factors.
                              III
    Contrary to Microchip’s assertion, the district court’s
Rule 54(b) certification was not improper. The order
certified the question of “what legal test the Court should
apply in determining the enforceability of the releases signed
by Plaintiffs Peter Schuman and William Coplin and the
majority of class members.”
    Under Rule 54(b), “[w]hen an action presents more than
one claim for relief . . . or when multiple parties are
involved, the court may direct entry of a final judgment as to
one or more, but fewer than all, claims or parties only if the
court expressly determines that there is no just reason for
delay.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(b). The district court here both
expressly directed entry of final judgment against Schuman
and Coplin and expressly determined that “there is no just
reason for delay.” See United States v. Gila Valley Irrigation
Dist., 859 F.3d 789, 797 (9th Cir. 2017); Noel v. Hall,
568 F.3d 743, 747 (9th Cir. 2009).
    “Our function on appeal is to ‘scrutinize the district
court’s evaluation of such factors as the interrelationship of
the claims so as to prevent piecemeal appeals in cases which
should be reviewed only as single units.’” Noel, 568 F.3d at
747 (quoting Curtiss-Wright Corp. v. Gen. Elec. Co.,
446 U.S. 1, 10 (1980)). We review de novo the district
court’s determination of the “juridical concerns” underlying
the order, such as the “interrelationship of the claims,” while
               SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.              17


the “equitable analysis” regarding the need for an
interlocutory appeal “ordinarily ‘is left to the sound judicial
discretion of the district court.’” Jewel v. Nat’l Sec. Agency,
810 F.3d 622, 628 (9th Cir. 2015) (quoting Wood v. GCC
Bend, LLC, 422 F.3d 873, 878–79 (9th Cir. 2005)).
    The order easily satisfies each requirement. The district
court’s reasoning as to the “juridical concerns” properly
centered on the need to answer the threshold legal question
of the test for enforceability of all class members’ releases
to “streamline the ensuing litigation,” including by guiding
the determination of whether class treatment was still
appropriate. Id. (quoting Noel, 568 F.3d at 747). The district
court’s “assessment of equitable factors such as prejudice
and delay” was similarly proper, Noel, 568 F.3d at 747, as
the court found that “all parties, and the Court, will benefit
from a prompt interlocutory review” to resolve the legal
question, see Texaco, Inc. v. Ponsoldt, 939 F.2d 794, 797–
98 (9th Cir. 1991). There was no error in the certification
order.
                              IV
    We lack appellate jurisdiction over Microchip’s cross-
appeal from the underlying partial summary judgment order.
An order granting partial summary judgment is not an
appealable final order. Dannenberg v. Software Toolworks
Inc., 16 F.3d 1073, 1074 (9th Cir. 1994).
    Microchip contends that pendent appellate jurisdiction
or the collateral order doctrine nevertheless provides
jurisdiction. This is incorrect. Pendent jurisdiction does not
apply because the issue raised in the cross-appeal—whether
the judgment against Schuman and Coplin extinguished the
non-named plaintiffs’ claims—is not “inextricably
intertwined with” the issue “properly before us on
18              SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.


interlocutory appeal.” Meredith v. Oregon, 321 F.3d 807,
812–13 (9th Cir. 2003) (cleaned up), amended, 326 F.3d
1030 (9th Cir. 2003). “[T]he legal theories on which the
issues advance must either (a) be so intertwined that we must
decide the pendent issue in order to review the claims
properly raised on interlocutory appeal, or (b) resolution of
the issue properly raised on interlocutory appeal necessarily
resolves the pendent issue.” Cunningham v. Gates, 229 F.3d
1271, 1285 (9th Cir. 2000) (citations omitted). But “two
issues are not inextricably intertwined where their resolution
requires ‘application of separate and distinct legal
standards’”—that is, standards that “turn on wholly different
factors.” Arc of Cal. v. Douglas, 757 F.3d 975, 993 (9th Cir.
2014) (first quoting Meredith, 321 F.3d at 815; then quoting
Burlington N. & Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. Vaughn, 509 F.3d 1085,
1093 (9th Cir. 2007)).
    Microchip’s theory of jurisdiction is that “[t]he judgment
entered against” the named plaintiffs—which is the issue
“properly raised on interlocutory appeal”—“necessarily
resolves” the issue raised in the cross-appeal, “i.e., the legal
consequence of that judgment for the unnamed class
members.” But the issue on appeal is a narrow one: whether
the district court applied the correct legal test for
enforceability of the releases, and, if not, what test is proper.
The resolution of that legal issue does not “necessarily
resolve[]” the issue of whether the district court should have
granted summary judgment against the non-named plaintiffs
as well. Cunningham, 229 F.3d at 1285.
    Further, the legal standards relevant to the appeal and
cross-appeal are “separate and distinct,” as they “turn on
wholly different factors.” Arc of Cal., 757 F.3d at
993 (cleaned up). Resolution of the appeal depends on legal
standards specific to the enforceability of releases under
               SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.               19


ERISA, whereas the cross-appeal requires application of
legal standards governing the adjudication and management
of class actions. These standards “turn on wholly different
factors.” Id.
      The collateral order doctrine is similarly inapposite.
Three conditions must be met for the doctrine to apply:
“First, [the order] must conclusively determine the disputed
question; second, it must resolve an important issue
completely separate from the merits of the action; third, it
must be effectively unreviewable on appeal from a final
judgment.” United States v. Tillman, 756 F.3d 1144, 1149
(9th Cir. 2014) (alteration in original) (quoting Flanagan v.
United States, 465 U.S. 259, 265 (1984)). Microchip
contends that the collateral order at issue is the partial grant
of summary judgment in favor of Microchip, “against
. . . only the class representatives.”
    “We need not address whether” the issue presented by
the cross-appeal “meets the first and second prongs of the
test outlined above because it is effectively reviewable on
appeal.” Cunningham, 229 F.3d at 1284. Reversing and
remanding the grant of summary judgment against Schuman
and Coplin gives Microchip another chance to argue that
summary judgment against the named plaintiffs requires
summary judgment against the class. The outcome would
be reviewable on a later appeal.
    We therefore dismiss the cross-appeal for lack of
jurisdiction.
                               V
    In sum, we hold that releases and waivers under ERISA
must “withstand special scrutiny designed to prevent
potential employer or fiduciary abuse.” Vizcaino, 120 F.3d
20             SCHUMAN V. MICROCHIP TECH. INC.


at 1012. This scrutiny requires courts to consider whether
the plaintiff entered into the release knowingly and
voluntarily, and will be of particular importance where, as
here, there is evidence that the defendant potentially
breached its fiduciary duty by or in the course of obtaining a
release of ERISA claims. Summary judgment against
Schuman and Coplin is reversed, and we remand to the
district court for further proceedings consistent with this
opinion.
   REVERSED AND REMANDED; CROSS-APPEAL
DISMISSED.