United States Court of Appeals
                     For the First Circuit


No. 24-1714

                      HARLAN SHABSHELOWITZ,

                      Plaintiff, Appellant,

                               v.

 STATE OF RHODE ISLAND DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY, STATE POLICE
 and LIEUTENANT MICHAEL CASEY, individually and in his capacity
   as a police officer employed by the State of Rhode Island,

                     Defendants, Appellees.


          APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                FOR THE DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND

       [Hon. John J. McConnell, Jr., U.S. District Judge]


                             Before

                  Rikelman, Lynch, and Aframe,
                        Circuit Judges.


     Gary G. Pelletier, Pelletier Clark & Caley, LLC, V. Edward
Formisano, and Formisano and Company on brief for appellant.

     Rajaram Suryanarayan, Andrew Plocica, Gunning & LaFazia,
Inc., and Jeff Kidd, Special Assistant Attorney General, on brief
for appellees.


                       September 12, 2025
               LYNCH, Circuit Judge.       Harlan Shabshelowitz appeals from

the    grant    of   summary    judgment       to    the    state   law   enforcement

defendants in his suit against them for malicious prosecution.

Shabshelowitz's         suit   arises    out    of    his    arrest    and    criminal

proceedings on charges of obtaining money under false pretenses in

violation of R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 11-41-4 and 11-41-5 (2002), and

conspiracy to obtain money under false pretenses in violation of

R.I.    Gen.     Laws     §§   11-1-6,     11-41-4,         and     11-41-5     (2002).

Shabshelowitz argues to us, but he did not argue to the federal

district court, that defendants failed to establish the "final

judgment" element of Rhode Island collateral estoppel law, and

that he was deprived of a full and fair opportunity to litigate in

state court because appellate review in the Rhode Island Supreme

Court was unavailable.          On appeal, Shabshelowitz has conceded the

identity of issues element.             He has waived his new arguments by

failing to present them to the district court.                    He has also failed

to    meet   this    circuit's    standards         for    considering    his    waived

arguments and so we affirm on the basis of waiver.

                                         I.

               We briefly recite the relevant, undisputed facts of

record.

               Shabshelowitz was indicted on March 28, 2013, by a Rhode

Island grand jury, along with four co-defendants, on charges of

obtaining money under false pretenses and conspiracy to obtain


                                        - 2 -
money   under    false     pretenses.    The   charges      arose    out   of   his

participation in what was charged              as a conspiracy to commit

mortgage fraud.

           Shabshelowitz filed five separate motions to dismiss the

criminal charges before a Rhode Island Superior Court Magistrate

in or around June 2015.            In response, the Magistrate held two

separate hearings, including an evidentiary hearing where witness

testimony was taken.          In support of his motions, Shabshelowitz

submitted "memos, grand jury transcripts, and witness testimony"

from three witnesses, including Shabshelowitz himself, which he

presented at an evidentiary hearing held on April 29, 2016.

Shabshelowitz argued, inter alia, that his case should be dismissed

because of alleged misconduct committed during the grand jury

proceedings including prosecutorial misconduct, presentation of

misleading      evidence,    and   missing   and    altered    evidence.        The

Magistrate      rejected    Shabshelowitz's     argument      and    denied     his

motions in an oral order issued June 10, 2016.

           Shabshelowitz appealed this ruling to the Rhode Island

Superior Court, though he did not appeal the Magistrate's decision

rejecting his claim that evidence was missing.                      An Associate

Justice of the Superior Court held a hearing on that appeal on

December 13, 2016, at which, on de novo review, that Justice denied

Shabshelowitz's      appeal    and   adopted   in    full     the   Magistrate's




                                     - 3 -
decision.1        The Associate Justice also supplemented the Rhode

Island Magistrate's opinion with additional observations about the

issues he raised, noting that Shabshelowitz "ha[d] not presented

evidence of any misconduct by the prosecutor that rose to the level

of justifying dismissal" nor had he "established that there was a

pervasive scheme to present false information to the Grand Jury

sufficient to justify dismissing the indictment or even that there

was a sufficient amount of false factual information presented to

the       Grand   Jury   to   justify   dismissing   the   indictment."

Shabshelowitz did not attempt to take an appeal from the Associate

Justice's ruling.

              On June 5, 2017, the Rhode Island Attorney General's

Office filed a nolle prosequi of the charges against Shabshelowitz,

pursuant to Rhode Island Rule of Criminal Procedure 48(a), as part



      1   Under Rhode Island Superior Court Rule of Practice
2.9(h), an Associate Justice's review of a Magistrate's decision
involves:
              a de novo determination of those portions to
              which the appeal is directed and [the
              Associate Justice] may accept, reject, or
              modify, in whole or in part, the judgment,
              order, or decree of the magistrate.        The
              justice, however, need not formally conduct a
              new hearing and may consider the record
              developed before the magistrate, making his or
              her own determination based on that record
              whether there is competent evidence upon which
              the magistrate's judgment, order, or decree
              rests. The justice may also receive further
              evidence, recall witnesses or recommit the
              matter with instructions.


                                   - 4 -
of a plea agreement that the Attorney General's Office reached

with one of Shabshelowitz's co-defendants.

              More than thirty-two months later, on February 27, 2020,

Shabshelowitz filed this lawsuit in federal court alleging a state

law claim for malicious prosecution.2           Shabshelowitz argued that

the   State    lacked   probable   cause   to   prosecute   him,   but   had

nevertheless induced the grand jury to indict him by withholding

exculpatory evidence and misrepresenting pieces of inculpatory

evidence.

              Discovery closed on November 22, 2023, after numerous

extensions of that deadline.         The defendants moved for summary

judgment on January 16, 2024.       The defendants argued, inter alia,3

that Shabshelowitz was collaterally estopped from arguing that his

grand jury indictment was procured without probable cause because

the issues in question were "the same basic issue[s]" as those in

Shabshelowitz's state court motion to dismiss.              The defendants

asserted that "all three requirements" of Rhode Island collateral


      2   The defendants in this case are the Rhode Island
Department of Public Safety, the Rhode Island State Police, and
Rhode Island State Police Officer Michael Casey, in both his
individual and official capacities. Shabshelowitz also initially
asserted claims arising under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, the Rhode Island
Constitution, and several state law torts. Shabshelowitz amended
his complaint on February 9, 2021, to omit all but the malicious
prosecution   claim.     The   suit   proceeds  under  diversity
jurisdiction.
      3   The   defendants  also   argued  that   Shabshelowitz's
malicious prosecution claim failed on the merits.


                                   - 5 -
estoppel law were present in this case, namely that "(1) the

parties [we]re the same or in privity with the parties of the

previous proceeding; (2) a final judgment on the merits ha[d] been

entered in the previous proceeding;" and "(3) the issue or issues

in question [we]re identical in both proceedings."    The defendants

provided extensive argument as to why each element of Rhode Island

collateral estoppel law was satisfied.

          Shabshelowitz's response and sur-reply argued only that

the "identity of issues" element of collateral estoppel had not

been satisfied and that, when the facts were viewed in the light

most favorable to the merits of his malicious prosecution claim,

summary judgment was inappropriate.

          The district court    rejected the argument presented,

finding that the issues were identical.        It    granted summary

judgment to the defendants on the ground that Shabshelowitz was

collaterally estopped from relitigating the issue of whether the

State engaged in prosecutorial misconduct during the grand jury

proceedings.   The district court noted that "[t]wo Rhode Island

state courts denied Mr. Shabshelowitz's motion to dismiss his state

charges, rejecting his arguments that his indictment was procured

by fraud and misconduct."   It concluded that "[b]ecause the issues

in state court are identical to those brought here (and there was

a final disposition and the parties are the same), collateral




                               - 6 -
estoppel   bars      [Shabshelowitz]     from    re-litigating      a   claim    he

already lost."

                                        II.

           We review grants of summary judgment de novo.                   Baez v.

Baymark Detoxification Servs., Inc., 123 F.4th 62, 66 (1st Cir.

2024).     In     light    of    the    defendants'     lead      argument    that

Shabshelowitz has waived the arguments he now presents as to the

preclusive effect of his motion to suppress, it is necessary to

"look to state law to determine the preclusive effect of a prior

state court judgment."      McCrory v. Spigel (In re Spigel), 260 F.3d

27, 33 (1st Cir. 2001).         Under Rhode Island law,

           [c]ollateral estoppel attaches when (1) there
           is an identity of issues between the two
           proceedings, (2) the previous proceeding
           resulted in a final judgment on the merits,
           and (3) the party against whom collateral
           estoppel is asserted is the same or in privity
           with a party from the previous proceeding.


Osifodunrin     v.    Desjardins,      333    A.3d   502,   504    (R.I.     2025).

Shabshelowitz argues to this court that the district court erred

under the second prong, contending both that there was no final

judgment and that the asserted inability to obtain appellate review

deprived him of a full and fair opportunity to litigate.

           Shabshelowitz's only argument to the district court as

to why collateral estoppel should not attach was that the "identity

of issues" element had not been satisfied, an argument which he



                                       - 7 -
has now abandoned on appeal.      Shabshelowitz had ample notice of

the defendants' argument that the denial of his motions to dismiss

constituted final judgment on the merits and that he had received

a full and fair opportunity to litigate in state court, yet he

chose to respond only to the defendants' "identity of the issues"

argument.

            These arguments by Shabshelowitz have been waived.        In

general,    "an   appellant   who,"   like   Shabshelowitz,   "has   not

proffered a particular claim or defense in the district court 'may

not unveil it in the court of appeals.'"          Nat'l Ass'n of Soc.

Workers v. Harwood, 69 F.3d 622, 627 (1st Cir. 1995) (quoting

United States v. Slade, 980 F.2d 27, 30 (1st Cir. 1992)).       "If any

principle is settled in this circuit, it is that, absent the most

extraordinary circumstances, legal theories not raised squarely in

the lower court cannot be broached for the first time on appeal."

Teamsters, Chauffeurs, Warehousemen & Helpers Union, Local No. 59

v. Superline Transp. Co., 953 F.2d 17, 21 (1st Cir. 1992); see

also Iverson v. City of Boston, 452 F.3d 94, 102 (1st Cir. 2006)

(collecting cases).

            Shabshelowitz has not met his burden to show that any

exception to this circuit's "raise or waive" rule applies.           This

case does not present the "exceptional circumstances" needed to

consider whether to excuse his waiver.       Sindi v. El-Moslimany, 896

F.3d 1, 28 (1st Cir. 2018).           There is nothing "sufficiently


                                 - 8 -
compelling" about Shabshelowitz's claim to justify relaxing our

"fundamental rule" that arguments first be properly raised before

the district court.4   Curet-Velázquez v. ACEMLA de P.R., Inc., 656

F.3d 47, 53 (1st Cir. 2011).   Shabshelowitz makes no argument that

this waiver was inadvertent.   He chose his arguments for whatever

strategic purpose he had in focusing on the "identity of issues"




     4    The district court determined that collateral estoppel
applied because Shabshelowitz received a full and fair opportunity
to litigate the matter in the Superior Court, which conducted an
evidentiary hearing and heard testimony from Shabshelowitz and
others. The district court also noted that Shabshelowitz failed
to appeal the Superior Court's ultimate decision, further
supporting application of the collateral estoppel doctrine. On
appeal, Shabshelowitz challenges the district court's assumption
that a further state court appeal had been available to him, and
he attempts to use this challenge as an opportunity to advance a
new argument against the application of collateral estoppel --
specifically, that "the absence of a non-frivolous appeal process
deprived him of a full and fair opportunity to litigate" the
matter.

     That argument is waived. Shabshelowitz entirely failed to
raise it in the district court despite having ample notice of the
defendants' position that he had received a full and fair
opportunity to litigate the matter. Although we have held that,
under "unique circumstances," an appellate court may consider an
issue not squarely presented in the district court if the court
nonetheless reaches the issue, no such unique circumstances are
present here. See Dahua Tech. USA, Inc. v. Zhang, 138 F.4th 1, 10
(1st Cir. 2025).

     In any event, even if the argument were not waived, we see no
merit to Shabshelowitz's core contention that he lacked a full and
fair opportunity to litigate the matter.     As the district court
observed, the Superior Court conducted a thorough evidentiary
hearing and provided Shabshelowitz the opportunity to present
evidence and call witnesses, sufficiently extending to him a full
and fair hearing such that collateral estoppel applies. See Seddon
v. Bonner, 755 A.2d 823, 828 (R.I. 2000).


                               - 9 -
element before the district court, then abandoning that argument

on appeal to press his argument that there was no final judgment

on the merits.    See Harwood, 69 F.3d at 628.         It has also been

more than twelve years since the conclusion of the grand jury

proceedings,   approximately   eight   years   since   the    hearings   on

Shabshelowitz's motion to dismiss, and more than a year and a half

since the defendants moved for summary judgment.             Shabshelowitz

received the benefit of a settlement the State of Rhode Island

reached with one of his co-defendants.    He has not shown that there

would be no prejudice to the defendants after this passage of time

and under these circumstances.     See id.

          Because we find waiver we do not reach the merits of any

of Shabshelowitz's arguments.

          The grant of summary judgment to defendants is affirmed.

Costs are awarded to defendants.




                                - 10 -