United States Court of Appeals
                     For the First Circuit


No. 24-1705

  STATE TEACHERS RETIREMENT SYSTEM OF OHIO, individually and on
            behalf of all others similarly situated,

                      Plaintiff, Appellant,

    SHARAN COLEMAN, individually and on behalf of all others
                       similarly situated,

                           Plaintiff,

                               v.

CHARLES RIVER LABORATORIES INTERNATIONAL, INC.; JAMES C. FOSTER;
                         DAVID R. SMITH,

                     Defendants, Appellees,

                          FLAVIA PEASE,

                           Defendant.


          APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
               FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

          [Hon. Denise J. Casper, U.S. District Judge]


                             Before

                 Montecalvo, Lynch, and Kayatta,
                         Circuit Judges.


     Matthew W.H. Wessler, with whom Thomas Scott-Railton, Gabriel
E. Chess, Alisa C. Philo, Gupta Wessler LLP, Frederic S. Fox,
Donald R. Hall, Jeffrey P. Campisi, Pamela A. Mayer, Brandon Fox,
Carihanna Morrison, Kaplan Fox & Kilsheimer LLP, Edward F. Haber,
Patrick J. Vallely, and Shapiro Haber & Urmy LLP were on brief,
for appellant.
     Charles S. Duggan, with whom David B. Toscano, Luca Marzorati,
Oliver Kaufman, Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP, Mara Theophila, and
McDermott Will & Emery LLP were on brief, for appellees.


                         August 15, 2025
            KAYATTA, Circuit Judge.            Lead plaintiff State Teachers

Retirement System of Ohio ("State Teachers") and other investors

of   defendant     Charles    River     Laboratories        International,      Inc.

("Charles    River")     brought    this      securities-fraud       class    action

alleging    that    Charles    River    and     two    of   its   officers    misled

investors    as    to   the   integrity    of    the    overseas     supply    chain

undergirding its supply of long-tailed macaques -- a central part

of the company's business.             Charles River moved to dismiss the

complaint for failure to state a claim.               The district court agreed

that State Teachers had failed to allege false or misleading

statements as well as scienter; thus, without reaching any further

issues, the district court dismissed the action.                    State Teachers

timely appealed.

            For the following reasons, we agree with State Teachers

that   it   plausibly     alleged      that     Charles     River    knowingly    or

recklessly misled investors as to problems lurking in its supply

chain.   We therefore reverse the district court's dismissal of the

complaint as to one set of misleading statements.                   And we remand

for the district court to consider in the first instance whether

State Teachers plausibly alleged that any of its losses were caused

by Charles River's misdirection.




                                       - 3 -
                                             I.

                                             A.

             "As this case comes to us on a motion to dismiss, we

accept the factual allegations set forth in the amended complaint,"

Constr. Indus. & Laborers Joint Pension Tr. v. Carbonite, Inc., 22

F.4th   1,    4   (1st    Cir.    2021),       and    "disregard    any   conclusory

allegations," Ponsa-Rabell v. Santander Sec. LLC, 35 F.4th 26, 30

n.2 (1st Cir. 2022).             We also consider "documents incorporated

into the complaint by reference."                   Tellabs, Inc. v. Makor Issues

& Rts., Ltd., 551 U.S. 308, 322 (2007).

             Charles River is a global drug-development company that

is   "the    largest     provider      of    outsourced    drug    discovery,   non-

clinical     development,        and    regulated       safety    testing   services

worldwide."       The company derives over 80% of its revenue from two

business segments: providing animals for drug-development research

and safety testing, and conducting that research itself.                    Per U.S.

Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulations, biologic drug

development typically requires safety testing on live monkeys

("non-human primates," as they are known in the industry). Charles

River is "the largest commercial user of [non-human primates] in

the [United States]."

             One of the most commonly used monkeys for these purposes

is the long-tailed macaque, the international trade of which was

valued at nearly $1.26 billion between 2010 and 2019.                         Before


                                            - 4 -
spring 2020, Charles River relied on Chinese exports for over 60%

of its long-tailed macaque supply.              But when the COVID-19 pandemic

hit, China halted exports of many species of wildlife, and its

"exports of long-tailed macaques to the U.S. declined to zero."

At the same time, also as a result of the pandemic, demand for

Charles River's safety-testing services increased.                    To maintain

its profitability, therefore, Charles River needed to overhaul its

supply chain.

           Toward that end, Charles River rapidly increased exports

from Cambodia.     Charles River obtained at least 2,262 long-tailed

macaques from Envigo Global Services, Inc. ("Envigo") and Orient

BioResource     Center,     Inc.   ("Orient       BioResource"),      which    were

acquired   by    Inotiv,    Inc.   ("Inotiv"),       a   publicly   traded     U.S.

company, on November 5, 2021, and January 27, 2022, respectively.

Envigo   and    Orient    BioResource     "obtained      approximately    60%    of

[their] Cambodia[n] long-tailed macaques from the Vanny Group," a

Hong Kong-based network led by CEO James Lau which bred macaques

in Cambodia and Vietnam for export.             Inotiv's "principal supplier"

of long-tailed macaques was the Vanny Group.

           Charles       River   also    directly     obtained   at    least    512

macaques from a Vietnam-based company that was also part of the

Vanny Group, Nafovanny, a joint venture between another Vanny Group




                                        - 5 -
subsidiary and the government of Vietnam;1 over 1,000 live macaques

or macaque-based extracts from another Vanny Group subsidiary, KHI

Bioservices Ltd. ("KHI"); at least 956 long-tailed macaques in

2022       from    Florida-based     broker   WorldWide      Primates,    Inc.    ("WW

Primates"); and over 10,000 macaques between 2020 and 2022 from

K.F. (Cambodia) Ltd. ("KF Cambodia"), a Cambodian company that

managed a macaque breeding farm.

                  Between May 7, 2020 and November 2, 2022, Charles River

repeatedly disclosed in filings with the U.S. Securities and

Exchange Commission (SEC) that "limited global supply or regional

restrictions on transportation for certain products may require us

to source products from non-preferred vendors."                       Nevertheless,

Charles       River's      safety-testing     business      "boomed,"    with    stock

prices increasing from $156.56 per share in May 2020 to a high of

$460.21 per share in September 2021.

                  Meanwhile, Cambodia's macaque export boom -- up to an

86%    increase       in   exports    to   the     United   States    from   2019   to

2020 -- was beginning to ring alarm bells at the U.S. Department

of Justice (DOJ) and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (the

"Service").          This is because, put simply, breeding long-tailed

macaques in captivity takes time, thus raising doubts that any

short-term         increase    in    supply   was     entirely   of     captive-bred



       1    Lau, the Vanny Group CEO, founded Nafovanny.


                                           - 6 -
macaques.   Their gestation period is a full six months; successful

pregnancies typically produce only one baby.             And infant macaques

must stay with their mothers until they are at least two years old

before they are deemed sufficiently mature by medical researchers.

            Supplementing the captive-bred population with wild-

caught   macaques,       however,   is    ill-advised:     Wild    populations

frequently have pathogens that make them unsuitable for medical

research.        And,    most   importantly    for   federal    investigators,

Cambodia outlaws the capture and export of wild macaques due to

the species' vulnerability to extinction.                Accordingly, it is

illegal under international and U.S. law to attempt to import

Cambodian long-tailed macaques caught in the wild.              See Convention

on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and

Flora (CITES) art. IV(2)(b), opened for signature Mar. 3, 1973, 87

Stat.    893,    993     U.N.T.S.   244    (requiring    that     an    exported

"specimen . . . not [be] obtained in contravention of the laws of

th[e] [country of export] for the protection of fauna and flora");

16 U.S.C. § 1538(c) (making it "unlawful for any person . . . to

engage in any trade in any specimens [of wildlife] contrary to the

provisions of the [CITES], or to possess any specimens traded

contrary    to     the    provisions      of   the   [CITES]");    16    U.S.C.

§ 3372(a), (a)(1) (making it "unlawful for any person . . . to

import, export, transport, sell, receive, acquire, or purchase any

fish or wildlife or plant taken, possessed, transported, or sold


                                     - 7 -
in violation of any law, treaty, or regulation of the United

States").

            In 2021 and early 2022, signs of an ongoing federal

investigation became public.       On August 4, 2021, the DOJ issued a

press release disclosing that an Orient BioResource executive had

pled guilty for lying to the Service about "whether he . . .

prepared    or   submitted . . .   any    audits      or    reports   concerning

visits to supplier sites in Cambodia," during what the press

release     called    an    ongoing      "criminal         investigation      into

international trafficking of primates into the United States."

Next, in early 2022, Inotiv disclosed in separate filings with the

SEC that its subsidiaries, Envigo and Orient BioResource, had both

received    grand    jury   subpoenas    from   the    DOJ     related   to   the

importation of non-human primates.          At the time, "investors were

unaware that Inotiv was a material supplier . . . to Charles

River."

            By the fall of 2022, unbeknownst to investors, Charles

River began experiencing supply interruptions.                On September 21,

2022, the Service seized a KF Cambodia shipment of 360 long-tailed

macaques headed to Charles River. See 50 C.F.R. § 14.53(b), (b)(1)

(2025) (authorizing any Service officer to "refuse clearance of

imported or exported wildlife . . . when there are responsible

grounds to believe that," among other things, "[a] [f]ederal law

or regulation has been violated").          The shipment had a reported


                                   - 8 -
value of $3.24 million.          It was the first such seizure of a KF

Cambodia shipment of macaques by the Service.2                    Unaware of the

seizure, analysts still understood Charles River to be in a strong

position;    the      prevailing      understanding        was     that,     as     a

September 29,      2022    report     from    investment    services       company

Jefferies put it, increased demand for macaques had put Charles

River in a "positive" scenario.

            On November 16, 2022, the DOJ unsealed an indictment

alleging the existence of a conspiracy to smuggle long-tailed

macaques into the United States for financial gain, including by

capturing wild macaques, falsifying their export permits, and

exporting them to the United States.            The indictment named Lau as

a defendant, identifying him as the CEO and owner of Vanny HK.                    It

also named five other executives and employees of Vanny HK and

what the indictment identified as Vanny HK's subsidiary, Vanny

Cambodia.       The      indictment    also    charged     several     Cambodian

government officials and two unnamed U.S.-based companies as co-

conspirators, which State Teachers alleges to be Inotiv (or its

subsidiaries)      and    WW   Primates.      The   unsealed     indictment       was

accompanied by a DOJ press release stating that "[m]embers of an

international      primate     smuggling     ring   have   been    charged    with

multiple felonies for their role in bringing wild long-tailed


     2  The shipment has since cleared customs, and the related
investigations have been closed.


                                      - 9 -
macaques      into    the   United       States."     The   press   release     also

identified at least two of the defendants as employees of the Vanny

Group, rather than by the specific subsidiaries that were their

employers.          Several   analyst      reports    discussing    the    indicted

suppliers also referred broadly to "Vanny" rather than specific

subsidiaries.

              The    day    after   the    indictment    was    unsealed,   Inotiv

disclosed in an SEC filing that its "principal supplier" of

macaques was a target of the indictment.                       But at the time,

"investors     were     [still]     unaware    that    Inotiv    was   a   material

supplier . . . of Charles River."                 Nor were investors otherwise

aware that Charles River was possibly buying macaques that came

from the suppliers targeted by the DOJ indictment.

              On November 30, 2022, Charles River filed a disclosure

with the SEC, stating that

              Charles River was not named or referenced in
              the DOJ proceedings, and the Company does not
              have any direct supply contracts with the
              indicted Cambodian supplier. . . . However,
              in light of the indictment, and subsequent
              statements made by the Cambodia[n] government,
              Charles   River   is   operating   under   the
              expectation that for some time period supply
              of   Cambodia-sourced   [macaques]   will   be
              difficult to obtain in the United States.

              On the same day, an analyst interviewed Charles River

CEO   James    C.    Foster    at   an    investor    conference.      During   the

interview, Foster emphasized that Charles River procured most of



                                         - 10 -
its   macaques   from   Cambodia   and   noted   the   potential   for   the

indictment to impact supply:

           [W]e have a little bit of a dialogue from
           government officials who were displeased with
           the action taken by the DOJ with regard to one
           of the Cambodian suppliers.      They were, I
           think,    defensive . . .   about   the   U.S.
           government saying that things aren't being
           done well [so] we're concerned about some
           pushback by the government. . . . [I]n light
           of this indictment and subsequent statements
           made   by    the  Cambodian   government,   we
           anticipate that for some period of time,
           there's going to be some disruption and
           difficulty in getting [macaques] into the
           [United States].

           However, Foster went on to assure investors that the

supply challenges Charles River faced did not include one of its

suppliers being indicted, repeating the assurance from Charles

River's SEC disclosure that "we don't have any direct contacts

with th[e] [indicted] supplier."         He also elaborated:

           [W]e work really hard with our supplier due
           diligence in terms of their management
           practices, veterinary practices, shipping
           practices, husbandry practices to ensure the
           quality of the supplier relationships and to
           ensure that what we do is fully compliant with
           U.S. and international regulations. . . .
           [The f]acility that we work with in Cambodia
           is [an] extremely high quality one, all the
           ones that we work with are high quality
           ones. . . .    So if we don't have undue
           government -- Cambodian government intrusion
           and preventing that from happening, it's
           possible we'll be fine. . . . [The indicted
           supplier is] not a supplier of ours. It's not
           directed to us. . . .    So [it] has no real
           short-term impact.



                                   - 11 -
Foster emphasized that although "some folks" would be "hurt" by

"the fact that one of the big suppliers from Cambodia . . . is

unable to ship," that supplier was "not a supplier of [Charles

River's]."

          Despite these assurances, the problems with Charles

River's supply chain continued to accelerate.    In December 2022

and January 2023, four additional KF Cambodia shipments headed to

Charles River were seized at the border; in total, and together

with the September 2022 shipment, the Service refused entry to the

United States of over $17.4 million of macaques headed to Charles

River -- nearly 8% of Charles River's total 2022 supply of non-

human primates.

          On January 12, 2023, Jefferies published a research

report that drew on a combination of "public data sources,"

"channel checks," "industry conversations," and a tweet from a

Cambodian official.   The report stated, in relevant part,

          Our previous [macaque] supply chain work
          concluded    [Charles    River]'s    [macaque]
          business was in a privileged position and
          controlled its own destiny. The indictment of
          Vanny and other Cambodian officials alters
          that viewpoint as we estimate ~24% of [Charles
          River's macaque] usage relies on Vanny supply
          (likely through an indirect relationship), a
          perspective        underappreciated         by
          investors. . . . After further investigation
          we believe [Charles River] received 20%+ of
          its [macaque] supply from Vanny in '21 and
          '22, through an indirect relationship.




                              - 12 -
At the close of trading that day, after unusually heavy trading

volume, Charles River's stock declined from $246.94 to $232.25 per

share, a decline of approximately 6%.

            On   February 22,    2023,    Charles    River    issued   a   press

release disclosing that it had received a grand jury subpoena in

an "investigation relat[ing] specifically to several shipments of

[macaques] received by Charles River from its Cambodia supplier"

and that it was "voluntarily suspend[ing] [macaque] shipments from

Cambodia at this time."         On the same day, Charles River filed a

disclosure form with the SEC, stating that it had been "informed

by the [DOJ] that . . . it had commenced an investigation into

[Charles     River's]   conduct     regarding       several     shipments     of

[macaques] from Cambodia." At the close of trading that day, after

unusually    heavy   trading    volume,    Charles    River's    stock     price

declined from $243.60 to $219.09 per share: a decline of over 10%.

            On March 15, 2023, Foster told investors on a conference

call that Charles River had "historically" used suppliers "that

get animals from wherever," though they "prefer[red] not to use

them."     At the close of trading that day, after unusually heavy

trading volume, Charles River's stock price declined from $205.02

per share to $194.90 per share: a decline of approximately 5%.

                                     B.

            On May 19, 2023, an individual investor filed a class

action against Charles River, Foster, and David. R. Smith, CFO of


                                   - 13 -
Charles River from August 2015 to May 2022.             On November 14 of

that year, State Teachers, as lead plaintiff, filed an amended

complaint, seeking relief on behalf of a class of all "persons and

entities    that   purchased   or   otherwise     acquired    Charles    River

securities during the period May 7, 2020 and March 15, 2023,

inclusive" (the "class period").3            The complaint seeks recovery

under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the "Act"), codified at

15 U.S.C. § 78j(b), as implemented by SEC Rule 10b-5, codified at

17 C.F.R. § 10b-5 (2025) (together, the "§ 10b claim"). Plaintiffs

also sought to hold Foster and Smith derivatively liable under

§ 20(a) of the Act, codified at 15 U.S.C. § 78t(a) (the "§ 20(a)

claim").

            Defendants moved to dismiss the action under Federal

Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6).            On July 1, 2024, the district

court granted their motion.     It first found that, in context, none

of   Charles   River's   statements    or     disclosures    alleged    in   the

complaint were false or misleading.              It next found that the

complaint did not adequately allege scienter on the part of Charles

River.     The district court did not reach the question of loss

causation.     And because it found that the complaint did not


      3 On May 7, 2020, Charles River disclosed its financial
results for the quarter ending March 28, 2020, and issued a press
release stating that it "implemented measures that are focused on
maintaining . . . the continuity of our operations [and]
sustaining our solid financial position" in the face of the COVID-
19 pandemic.


                                    - 14 -
adequately plead a § 10(b) violation, it therefore found that the

complaint also did not adequately state a claim for derivative

liability under § 20(a).        State Teachers timely appealed.

                                      II.

           Section 10(b) of the Act makes it "unlawful for any

person . . .    [t]o    use     or   employ . . .    any   manipulative     or

deceptive device" in, among other things, the sale of registered

securities.      15    U.S.C.    § 78j(b).      Accompanying       regulations

"implement[] that prohibition," Carbonite, 22 F.4th at 7, making

it unlawful to "make any untrue statement of a material fact or to

omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the

statements made, in the light of the circumstances under which

they were made, not misleading," 17 C.F.R. § 240.10b-5(b) (2025).

A § 10(b) claim must allege "(1) a material misrepresentation or

omission   by   the    defendant[s];    (2) scienter;      (3) a    connection

between the misrepresentation or omission and the purchase or sale

of   a   security;     (4) reliance     upon   the   misrepresentation     or

omission; (5) economic loss; and (6) loss causation."                Karth v.

Keryx Biopharmaceuticals, Inc., 6 F.4th 123, 135 (1st Cir. 2021)

(alteration in original) (quoting Amgen Inc. v. Conn. Ret. Plans

& Tr. Funds, 568 U.S. 455, 460–61 (2013)).

           To survive a Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss, a § 10(b)

complaint must not only "state a claim to relief that is plausible

on its face," Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007),


                                     - 15 -
but also "state with particularity the circumstances constituting

fraud," Fed. R. Civ. P. 9(b).     In addition, the Private Securities

Litigation Reform Act (PSLRA) mandates that the complaint must

"specify each statement alleged to have been misleading, [and] the

reason or reasons why the statement is misleading."            15 U.S.C.

§ 78u-4(b)(1).    The PSLRA further requires that a securities-fraud

complaint "state with particularity facts giving rise to a strong

inference that the defendant acted with the required state of

mind."   Id. § 78u-4(b)(2)(A).

          "We review de novo the district court's dismissal of a

securities fraud complaint for failure to state a claim under

Rule 12(b)(6)."      Mehta v. Ocular Therapeutix, Inc., 955 F.3d 194,

205 (1st Cir. 2020).     "In so doing, we accept well-pleaded factual

allegations in the complaint as true and, while cognizant of the

requirements   for    pleading   scienter,   we   view   all   reasonable

inferences in the plaintiff's favor."        Carbonite, 22 F.4th at 6.

                                  III.

          On appeal, State Teachers contends that its complaint

adequately alleges that Charles River's statements to investors

were false and misleading and that those statements were made

knowingly or recklessly as to their misleading nature.         We address

each of these arguments in turn.




                                 - 16 -
                                          A.

              To successfully plead that defendants made false or

misleading statements, plaintiffs must allege statements that

"were false or misleading at the time they were made."                     City of

Mia. Fire Fighters' and Police Officers' Ret. Tr. v. CVS Health

Corp.,   46    F.4th    22,   35   (1st    Cir.   2022)    (citation      omitted).

"[W]hether a statement is misleading depends on the perspective of

a reasonable investor."            Karth, 6 F.4th at 135 (alteration in

original)     (quoting    Omnicare,       Inc.    v.    Laborers   Dist.    Council

Constr. Indus. Pension Fund, 575 U.S. 175, 186 (2015)).                   And "[w]e

consider the entirety of the relevant facts available at the time

of the allegedly misleading statement," focusing on the "total mix

of information" available to investors at the time.                  Id. at 135–

36.

              State    Teachers    first       argues    that   Charles     River's

disclosures and Foster's statements to investors on November 30,

2022, were false and misleading because they conveyed that Charles

River was in a privileged position, with its supply chain not

impacted by the federal indictment of a raft of Vanny Group

officials -- when in fact key sources of Charles River's macaques

were targeted by the indictment.               Second, State Teachers argues

that Charles River's repeated statements in SEC disclosures over

the class period that it "may" be required to source macaques from

"non-preferred vendors" were false and misleading because Charles


                                     - 17 -
River was already relying on suppliers subject to law-enforcement

scrutiny. As explained further below, we agree with State Teachers

on the first theory but not the second.

                                 1.

           To start, we think Foster's November 2022 comments to

investors clearly conveyed to any reasonable investor that Charles

River's supply chain was untouched by the federal investigation

and indictment.   Foster point-blank told investors the indictment

would "ha[ve] no real short-term impact."    He repeatedly assured

them that the "[indicted] supplier" was "not a supplier of" Charles

River's.   True, Foster averred, the fact that employees of a major

supplier were indicted was "going to hurt some folks."        But,

according to Foster, "all" the "facilit[ies]" Charles River worked

with in Cambodia were "extremely high quality one[s],"4 clearly

messaging that Charles River was not "some folks."

           These statements, taken together and in context as part

of an interview with an analyst, would leave a reasonable investor

with the impression that Charles River's supply chain did not

include suppliers mentioned in or implicated by the DOJ indictment.


     4  Contrary to Charles River's suggestion, we view this
statement, in context, as clearly comparative and therefore
specific enough to be actionable. See Clorox Co. P.R. v. Proctor
& Gamble Com. Co., 228 F.3d 24, 39 (1st Cir. 2009) (holding that
a company's statement that "Whiter is not possible" was specific
enough to be actionable, because, in context, it "invite[d]
consumers to compare" the company's product with products
containing bleach).


                              - 18 -
See Zhou v. Desktop Metal, Inc., 120 F.4th 278, 293 (1st Cir. 2024)

("We evaluate the immediate context of each statement -- namely,

the balance of what was said on the particular occasion, and the

immediate circumstances in which the particular statement was

made." (cleaned up)).

           Contrary to what Foster conveyed to investors, though,

one of Charles River's suppliers Inotiv had already publicly

declared that its own "principal supplier" was a target of the

indictment, meaning Charles River was almost certainly importing

macaques   from   that    supplier,    albeit   through    an   intermediary,

despite assuring investors it was not.              This single, well-pled

allegation   directly     undermines     Foster's   representations     about

Charles River's supply chain.         Adding fuel to the fire, a shipment

of macaques headed to Charles River from a different supplier had

been seized two months prior.5           And finally, Charles River had

direct     supply        relationships      with     two        Vanny   Group




     5  In its briefing, Charles River argues that the complaint
lacks allegations linking this seizure to the indictment that
became public in November 2022.      And in a Rule 28(j) letter,
Charles River brings to our attention that, as it later turned
out, its seized shipments were ultimately cleared, and any related
investigations were closed. But Foster's comments were misleading
regardless: Reasonable investors would understand Charles River's
supply to be much more at risk than Foster's comments indicated if
they knew that, in the context of a federal indictment of companies
from which Charles River was likely obtaining macaques, a shipment
from another one of Charles River's suppliers had been seized at
the border.


                                  - 19 -
subsidiaries -- companies in the same network of suppliers as those

named in the indictment.

          As    Charles   River    notes,   "the   mere   possession   of

material, nonpublic information does not create a duty to disclose

it."   Hill v. Gozani, 638 F.3d 40, 57 (1st Cir. 2011) (cleaned

up).   But we have held that a defendant will be liable for "half-

truths [that] paint[] a materially false picture in what they say

because of what they omit."       SEC v. Johnston, 986 F.3d 63, 72 (1st

Cir. 2021).    Thus, where Foster chose to address the impact of the

indictment head-on, he could not do so in a manner that omitted

key information about Charles River's supply chain that would have

cast its risk of disruption from the federal investigation in an

entirely different light.     See Meyer v. Jinkosolar Holdings Co.,

761 F.3d 245, 250 (2d Cir. 2014) ("Even when there is no existing

independent duty to disclose information, once a company speaks on

an issue or topic, there is a duty to tell the whole truth.").

          Charles River suggests that its assurances concerning

its "supplier" should be read as referring only to its "direct"

suppliers because of its reference elsewhere to its "direct" supply

contracts.     For several reasons, we doubt that a reasonable

investor would infer such a qualification of Charles River's

assurances.     First,    referring   specifically   to   direct   supply

contracts in one part of a statement, while referring to suppliers

without limitation in another, implies that the latter use of the


                                  - 20 -
term "supplier" is unlimited.    Additionally, context and relevance

are important here.     The issue that Foster's comments addressed

and that was relevant to investors was Charles River's supply

chain, including both direct and indirect suppliers.         And as to

that obvious subject of the day, Foster's remarks read less like

a truthful disclosure and much more like a way to convey a false

message with partial disclosures and too-clever wordsmithing.6

           Charles River's final rejoinder is that any misleading

omissions were cured by Foster's statement that he "anticipate[d]

that for some period of time, there[ was] going to be some

disruption and difficulty in getting [macaques] into the [United

States]," and a similar warning in Charles River's disclosures

that same day, that "for some time period supply . . . [would] be

difficult to obtain in the United States."       But these statements

simply   acknowledged   that   the   industry   --   including   Charles

River -- faced challenges such as "pushback" by the Cambodian

government as well as general supply disruption.         Excluded from

these disclosures was any suggestion that Charles River faced an




     6  We are not, however, convinced by plaintiffs' argument that
the indictment of employees of two Vanny Group subsidiaries with
which Charles River did not have direct supply contracts would be
understood by any reasonable investor to also indict Vanny Group
subsidiaries with which Charles River did have direct contracts.
As a result, we leave intact the district court's finding that
Foster and Charles River's statements about its "direct" suppliers
were, by themselves, literally true, as far as they went.


                                - 21 -
additional      and      more    direct   challenge:       the    federal      government

indicting a source of its macaques.

              In     sum,   we   conclude       that    State    Teachers      adequately

alleged that Charles River's and Foster's November 2022 statements

misled investors into thinking Charles River's supply chain was

not implicated in the federal scrutiny of the Vanny Group.                             State

Teachers      has    therefore      plausibly      alleged       specific     misleading

statements on the part of defendants and "the reason or reasons

why the[y] [were] misleading," as required to sustain its § 10(b)

claim.       15 U.S.C. § 78u-4(b)(1)(B).

                                            2.

              State Teachers also argues that Charles River's repeated

disclosures from 2020 to 2022 that it "may" have to rely on "non-

preferred vendors" were misleading because, when Charles River

made those statements, it was already reliant on vendors that faced

"law       enforcement      scrutiny."          However,    we        find   insufficient

allegations in the complaint to establish that the term "non-

preferred vendors" meant, and would have been understood to mean,

vendors that faced "law enforcement scrutiny," as State Teachers

claims.        As    a   result,    we    leave    intact       the    district   court's

rejection of this theory as an independent and sufficient basis

for    a    claim.       Whether    and    to    what    extent       evidence    of   such

statements may be independently relevant to the adjudication of

the remaining claim, we leave to the district court.


                                          - 22 -
                                            B.

           State Teachers also challenges the district court's

determination that Charles River lacked scienter, "a mental state

embracing intent to deceive, manipulate, or defraud."                           Tellabs,

551 U.S. at 319 (citation omitted).                       To establish scienter,

plaintiffs    must    "show       either    that    the    defendants      consciously

intended to defraud, or that they acted with a high degree of

recklessness."       Mehta, 955 F.3d at 206 (citation omitted).                   And to

meet the requirements of the PSLRA, the pleaded facts must give

rise to a "strong" inference of scienter. 15 U.S.C. § 78u-4(b)(2).

"Strong"   need      not     be   "irrefutable,"          the    Supreme      Court   has

emphasized, but must be "cogent and at least as compelling as any

opposing   inference        one     could   draw    from        the   facts    alleged."

Tellabs, 551 U.S. at 324.             "The inquiry . . . is whether all of

the facts alleged, taken collectively, give rise to a strong

inference of scienter, not whether any individual allegation,

scrutinized in isolation, meets that standard."                       Id. at 322–23.

           As this case now stands, and assuming the allegations of

the   complaint      are    true,    scienter      flows        inexorably     from   our

conclusions    that        Charles    River      told   its     investors      that   its

suppliers were not implicated in the federal proceeding when it




                                       - 23 -
knew that its supply was coming from the entities subject to

investigation, seizure, and indictment.7

           None of Charles River's arguments to the contrary are

convincing. First, Charles River argues that it reasonably thought

that the September 2022 seizure of one of its macaque shipments

did not mean that future shipments were at risk of seizure.           But

such a view -- even apart from its implausibility -- does not

excuse sending the message to investors that the suppliers affected

by   the   indictment    were    "not . . .   supplier[s]   of   [Charles

River's]."     Second, Charles River prefers to focus on its and

Foster's statements that "we don't have any direct contacts with

that supplier."      But we think the addition of the word "direct" in

some statements only strengthens the inference of scienter:           Such

careful phrasing smacks of a "cleverly crafted" way of leading

investors astray.       Johnston, 986 F.3d at 74.        Finally, as for

Foster's and Charles River's statements warning investors that

Charles      River    expected     supply     to   "be    difficult    to

obtain" -- referring in context to possible pushback from the

Cambodian government -- we do not think telling investors of a

possible risk faced by the industry gave Charles River a free pass



     7  We need not address State Teachers' scienter arguments as
to Charles River's disclosures about potential use of "non-
preferred vendors," since we do not find merit in State Teacher's
arguments that those statements were themselves false or
misleading.


                                  - 24 -
to deceive investors about a specific risk faced by Charles River

itself.

            For the foregoing reasons, we agree with State Teachers

that its complaint "state[s] with particularity facts giving rise

to a strong inference that [Charles River] acted with the required

state of mind."    15 U.S.C. § 78u-4(b)(2)(A).8

                                  C.

            On appeal, Charles River asks us to reach the issue of

loss causation and affirm the district court on that ground, which

the district court did not reach despite briefing on the issue

below.    However, the issue of whether plaintiffs in this case have

adequately alleged "a corrective disclosure . . . associated with

a drop in share price" is complex.     Mass. Ret. Sys. v. CVS Caremark

Corp., 716 F.3d 229, 238 (1st Cir. 2013).     We therefore decline to

exercise our discretion to reach this issue, see Downing v. Globe

Direct LLC, 682 F.3d 18, 22 (1st Cir. 2012) (noting that "because

the parties fully briefed the issue before the district court, we

have discretion to" decide it), and instead leave it to the

district court to consider in the first instance.




     8  We leave it to the district court to consider in the first
instance whether -- given this opinion -- it should revive
plaintiffs' derivative § 20(a) claim.


                                - 25 -
                                 IV.

           We conclude that State Teachers plausibly alleged that

Charles River knowingly misled investors based on its November

2022   statements.   We   therefore    reverse   the   district   court's

decision in that regard.    And we otherwise vacate and remand for

further proceedings consistent with this opinion. Each party shall

bear its own costs on appeal.




                                - 26 -