United States Court of Appeals
                     For the First Circuit


No. 23-1362

                     STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE,

                      Plaintiff, Appellee,

                               v.

                           3M COMPANY,

                      Defendant, Appellant,

       E.I. DUPONT DE NEMOURS & COMPANY; CHEMOURS COMPANY,
         f/k/a THE CHEMOURS COMPANY, LLC; CORTEVA, INC.;
                     DUPONT DE NEMOURS, INC.,

                           Defendants.


          APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
               FOR THE DISTRICT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE

        [Hon. Landya B. McCafferty, U.S. District Judge]


                             Before

                 Rikelman, Howard, and Kayatta,
                         Circuit Judges.


     Michael A. Scodro, with whom Gary A. Isaac, Avi M. Kupfer,
Mayer Brown LLP, Joseph A. Foster, Mark C. Rouvalis, Viggo Fish,
and McLane Middleton were on brief, for appellant.
     Kenneth A. Sansone, with whom SL Environmental Law Group,
John D.S. Gilmour, Lana M. Rowenko, Kelley Drye & Warren LLP, John
M. Formella, Attorney General of New Hampshire, Anthony J.
Galdieri, Solicitor General of New Hampshire, and Christopher G.
Aslin, Senior Assistant Attorney General of New Hampshire,
Environmental Protection Bureau, were on brief, for appellee.
March 27, 2025
            KAYATTA, Circuit Judge.     In 2019, New Hampshire filed on

behalf of its residents          two lawsuits in state court against

3M Company ("3M") and several other chemical companies that have

produced synthetic chemical substances to which the parties refer

as "PFAS."    The lawsuits each assert that the defendants designed

defective PFAS products, negligently peddled those products to New

Hampshire    users,   and   concealed   vital   information    about   PFAS

toxicity from unwitting users and regulators.        The alleged result

has been widespread PFAS contamination of the state's natural

resources -- including its water, soil, vegetation, and animal

life -- for which New Hampshire seeks to hold the companies

responsible under state law.

            The two lawsuits differ in one key respect:         One seeks

damages only for PFAS from a class of products called aqueous film-

forming foam (AFFF).        The complaint in that suit -- the "AFFF

Suit" -- explicitly disclaims recovery for PFAS-containing non-

AFFF products.    By contrast, the other suit seeks damages only for

injuries     attributable   to    PFAS-containing   non-AFFF    products,

explicitly disclaiming recovery for AFFF PFAS.         We refer to that

lawsuit -- the subject of this interlocutory appeal -- as the "Non-

AFFF Suit."

            This appeal poses three questions: (1) whether we have

appellate jurisdiction over this appeal; (2) whether this case was

removable pursuant to the federal officer removal statute, 28


                                    - 3 -
U.S.C. § 1442(a)(1); and (3) whether 3M timely attempted removal

pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1446(b)(3).              We conclude that we have

appellate jurisdiction.         And because we agree with the district

court that 3M untimely attempted removal, we affirm.              We therefore

need not finally decide whether the removal would have comported

with the federal officer removal statute had it been timely.                Our

reasoning follows.

                                        I.

               In July 2019, 3M removed the AFFF Suit to federal court

under the federal officer removal statute on the grounds that the

AFFF at issue likely included AFFF made by 3M for what was then

the    Pease    Air   Force   Base   located   in   Rockingham    County,   New

Hampshire, under the direction of the U.S. military. New Hampshire

did not dispute the removal of the AFFF Suit, which was eventually

transferred to the District of South Carolina to become part of

ongoing multidistrict litigation (MDL) for AFFF products pending

in that court.        See In re Aqueous Film-Forming Foams Prods. Liab.

Litig., 357 F. Supp. 3d 1391 (J.P.M.L. 2018).

               Meanwhile, this Non-AFFF Suit proceeded in state court.

Over    the    next   three   years,    the    state   court    dismissed   New

Hampshire's trespass and public trust claims.                  In response, on

August 25, 2021, New Hampshire filed a second amended complaint

(the "complaint"), which remains the operative complaint.




                                       - 4 -
              In    December        2021,    New     Hampshire    filed   its    initial

disclosures        in   this    case.        The     disclosures      included   a   non-

exhaustive list of more than 200 sites that New Hampshire alleged

were contaminated with non-AFFF PFAS.1                      In the disclosures, New

Hampshire     warned         that   some     of     the   documents     concerning   the

disclosed sites may reference "sites with connections to the use

of [AFFF]," but reiterated that the state was not seeking recovery

for any AFFF-related injury.

              Four months later, 3M removed this case.                   To explain its

removal, 3M pointed to its own independent investigation, which

indicated that PFAS from an AFFF product called MilSpec AFFF that

3M manufactured at the direction of the U.S. military for Pease

Air   Force    Base      had    plausibly         commingled     with   non-AFFF     PFAS

pollution in nearby bodies of water, such as the Great Bay Estuary.

Repeatedly         stressing        that      the     state    alleged       "statewide"

contamination by non-AFFF PFAS, including contamination in an area

encompassing Pease Air Force Base, 3M argued that the injuries

alleged in the Non-AFFF Suit were plausibly attributable at least

in part to MilSpec AFFF.                     And once it became apparent that

"contamination          of    [any]     of    the     at-issue     natural     resources

plausibly came from AFFF used by the military in addition to non-


      1 For simplicity, we refer to contamination derived from AFFF
sources as "AFFF PFAS," contamination derived from non-AFFF
sources as "non-AFFF PFAS," and contamination derived from AFFF
that 3M produced for the government as "MilSpec AFFF PFAS."


                                             - 5 -
AFFF sources," reasoned 3M, this case "relate[d] to" that AFFF, no

matter    that   the   state    only     sought   damages   for     non-AFFF

contamination.    3M was therefore entitled, 3M argued, to a federal

forum in which it would "'rais[e] the production of MilSpec AFFF

as a defense or an alternative theory' of causation."

           New Hampshire moved to remand the case.           On March 29,

2023, the district court agreed that this case belongs in state

court, citing two independent justifications.          See New Hampshire

v. 3M Co., 665 F. Supp. 3d 215, 235 (D.N.H. 2023).                First, the

removal of the Non-AFFF Suit did not comport with the federal

officer removal statute.       See id.   Second, even if the removal did

comport with the statute, 3M untimely sought removal.             See id.

           On April 13, 3M filed a timely notice of appeal.              The

next day, New Hampshire asked the district court to "execute" the

remand.   The court agreed.     But it delayed the formal remand until

April 26 so 3M could -- if it so chose -- file for a stay pending

appeal.   3M did not do so, and the case formally returned to state

court on May 2.

           Before the parties filed their appellate briefs, New

Hampshire filed a motion for summary disposition, arguing that

this court lacked jurisdiction to hear 3M's appeal.         We denied the

motion without prejudice, and New Hampshire's appellate brief

reiterates the state's jurisdictional arguments.




                                   - 6 -
                                  II.

          We begin with New Hampshire's threshold contention that

we lack appellate jurisdiction.     New Hampshire highlights that 3M

declined the district court's invitation to request a stay of the

remand order.    As a result, the case has formally returned to state

court, leaving this court without a "formal procedural mechanism"

to retrieve it.     In the state's view, this case's enforced exile

to state court deprives us of the ability to hear this appeal.

          New Hampshire relies on our decision in Forty Six Hundred

LLC v. Cadence Education, LLC, 15 F.4th 70 (1st Cir. 2021).    There,

we quoted precedent observing that "once a district court has

decided to remand a case and has so notified the state court, the

district judge is without power to take any further action."       Id.

at 78 (citation omitted).    Hence, reasons New Hampshire, it is too

late to try to undo the remand.     But that quotation only concerned

district courts' lack of power to revisit "cases that fall within

the compass of 28 U.S.C. § 1447(d)," which bars review of certain

types of remand orders.     Id.   This is not such a case.   That same

statutory provision explicitly provides that the rejection of

removal under § 1442(a)(1) is subject to appellate review.      See 28

U.S.C. § 1447(d).

          In Forty Six Hundred, we also noted that no "formal

procedural mechanism" exists to return a wrongly remanded case to

federal court.      15 F.4th at 80.       Nevertheless, we explicitly


                                  - 7 -
affirmed our jurisdiction over an otherwise-reviewable remand

order,2 expressing our "confiden[ce]" that, should we find that

the case should not have been remanded, "the district court [could]

enlist the state court's cooperation and restore the action to its

own docket."        Id. at 79–81.     Similarly, we see no reason here to

doubt    that    "general     principles    of   comity,      cooperation,    and

communication between state and federal courts" will secure the

retrieval of the case if removal was proper.               Id. at 80.

               Taking a different tack, New Hampshire argues that "3M

has waived its right to appeal" or to request that the district

court "retrieve the case from state court" by failing to seek a

stay.    Forty Six Hundred did recognize the potential viability of

"waiver or estoppel" arguments in this context.                Id. at 79.     But

waiver   generally      requires    actions   that    signify    a   "clear   and

unequivocal" intent to relinquish a specific right, including the

right to a federal forum.          Northrop Grumman Tech. Servs., Inc. v.

DynCorp Int'l LLC, 865 F.3d 181, 186 (4th Cir. 2017) (stating that

waiver    of    a   party's   right    to   removal    must     be   "clear   and

unequivocal"); accord Rock Hemp Corp. v. Dunn, 51 F.4th 693, 701

(7th Cir. 2022); PR Grp., LLC v. Windmill Int'l, Ltd., 792 F.3d



     2  Our sister circuits have also concluded that, for cases
exempt from 28 U.S.C. § 1447(d)'s restrictions, "the certification
of the remand order imposes no independent bar on either our
jurisdiction or the district court's jurisdiction."      Hammer v.
HHS, 905 F.3d 517, 525 (7th Cir. 2018) (collecting cases).


                                      - 8 -
1025, 1026 (8th Cir. 2015); see also United States v. Sastrom, 96

F.4th 33, 40 (1st Cir. 2024) (invoking Forty Six Hundred to suggest

that a criminal defendant waived his ability to appeal the district

court's order transferring his case to another court, by failing

to challenge the order below or in his opening appellate brief).

Here,   we    see   no   evidence   that        3M    clearly   and   unequivocally

relinquished its right to appeal.                    So, while it may have been

prudent for 3M to move to stay the remand, we see no license in

the federal officer removal statute or elsewhere to condition our

review on the filing of such a motion.

                                         III.

              Having determined that we have jurisdiction to consider

3M's appeal, we turn next to the merits of 3M's challenge to the

order remanding this case to state court.                 3M attempted to remove

this case pursuant to the federal officer removal statute, which

enables removal of any "civil action . . . that is against . . .

any person acting under [a federal officer] . . . for or relating

to any act under color of such office."                 28 U.S.C. § 1442(a).      3M

contends that in this case, "[t]he existence of federal officer

[removal] jurisdiction . . . turns on whether the lawsuit is 'for

or relating to' MilSpec AFFF."             This is also known as the nexus

requirement.

              3M claims that this "case relates to 3M's supply of

MilSpec      AFFF   to   the   federal    government       because     the   natural


                                     - 9 -
resources at issue were allegedly contaminated by PFAS from both

MilSpec AFFF and non-AFFF sources."        Therefore, in 3M's view, "it

is clear that the alleged PFAS contamination of natural resources

in this 'state-wide contamination case' will encompass and overlap

with claims to recover for PFAS contamination caused at least in

part by MilSpec AFFF." Simply put, in the absence of any agreement

between the parties, the court in which this lawsuit is adjudicated

will have to decide for at least some of the statewide resources

at issue whether and to what extent MilSpec AFFF PFAS and non-AFFF

PFAS have commingled.    Hence, reasons 3M, this case "relates to,"

28 U.S.C. § 1442(a)(1), the federal authority under which 3M

produced   MilSpec   AFFF.   3M    also    argues,   in   defense   of   the

timeliness of its removal, that no plaintiff's paper predating

March 30, 2022 (i.e., thirty days before 3M filed its removal

papers), made clear that a court would need to engage in this

factfinding and thus alerted it to the case's removability.

           For purposes of this opinion, we assume without deciding

that 3M is correct that alleged commingling of MilSpec AFFF PFAS

and non-AFFF PFAS satisfies the nexus requirement. That assumption

then frames the question of timing, to which we now turn.

                                   IV.

           We review de novo the district court's conclusion that

3M untimely removed.    See Amoche v. Guarantee Tr. Life Ins. Co.,

556 F.3d 41, 48 (1st Cir. 2009).     In affirming the district court's


                                  - 10 -
conclusion, we may rely "on any basis supported by the record,"

including rationales predicated "on arguments not reached by the

district court or even presented to us on appeal."              Young v. Wells

Fargo Bank, N.A., 717 F.3d 224, 237 n.11 (1st Cir. 2013) (quoting

Jordan v. DOJ, 668 F.3d 1188, 1200 (10th Cir. 2011)).

             To secure a federal forum, a defendant must normally

remove   a   civil    action   within    thirty   days   of     receiving     the

plaintiff's initial pleading in state court.                   See    28 U.S.C.

§ 1446(b)(1).    But, sometimes, the initial pleading does not state

a removable case.       When that happens, the thirty-day clock only

starts when the plaintiff provides the defendant with "a copy of

an amended pleading, motion, order[,] or other paper" from which

the defendant may "ascertain[]" removability.                 Id. § 1446(b)(3)

(emphasis added); see also Romulus v. CVS Pharmacy, Inc., 770 F.3d

67, 72, 74 n.5 (1st Cir. 2014) (noting that a subsequent paper,

pleading, or motion must come from the plaintiff to trigger the

thirty-day clock under § 1446(b)).

             To trigger the thirty-day clock, a plaintiff's "other

paper" must "provide[] the defendant with sufficient information

to easily determine that the matter is removable."                Romulus, 770

F.3d at 72.     In assessing whether a paper provides the requisite

information,    a    defendant   may    not   simply   read    that   paper    in

isolation.    Rather, the defendant must ask whether that paper, "on

its face or in combination with earlier-filed pleadings, provides


                                   - 11 -
specific and unambiguous notice that the case satisfies federal

jurisdictional requirements." Id. at 74 (quoting Walker v. Trailer

Transit, Inc., 727 F.3d 819, 825 (7th Cir. 2013)).         And defendants

must   approach   this     inquiry    with   "a    reasonable    amount   of

intelligence,"    though     they    need    not    "perform    significant

investigation" to ascertain removability.          Id. at 75, 80.

          Here, the parties seem to agree that the complaint in

this suit did not, on its own, state a case that 3M could have

easily identified as removable.         See id. at 76.     In particular,

the complaint in this case did not contain any allegations making

it clear that some of the non-AFFF PFAS for which the state seeks

recovery may have commingled with MilSpec AFFF PFAS.            The relevant

question, then, is whether any subsequent "other paper," viewed

alongside preceding documents from this case, enabled 3M to "easily

determine," id. at 72, that any of the contamination at issue, in

3M's words, "plausibly came from both MilSpec AFFF and non-AFFF

sources" more than thirty days before it filed for removal on

April 29, 2022.

          The district court concluded that three different papers

independently triggered the thirty-day removal clock.            First, the

district court pointed to the complaint in the AFFF Suit.            See 3M,

665 F. Supp. 3d at 232.      But 3M maintains that the AFFF complaint

could not have started the removal clock because it is a paper

from another case that was never introduced in this case.                 See


                                    - 12 -
14C Charles Alan Wright & Arthur R. Miller, Federal Practice and

Procedure     § 3731   (4th ed.     2024)    (collecting     cases    for     the

proposition    that    "documents    not     generated    within     the    state

litigation generally are not recognized as 'other papers,' that

can start a 30-day removal period under [§] 1446(b)").

            The district court also suggested that 3M's own notice

of removal in the AFFF Suit could have triggered the removal clock.

See 3M, 665 F. Supp. 3d at 233–34.            Again, 3M counters that its

AFFF notice of removal is not a paper provided by the state in

this lawsuit and that the notice lacks the requisite facts to make

removability obvious.

            Finally,    the   district       court   concluded       that     New

Hampshire's December 2021 disclosures in this case could have

started the removal clock.        See id. at 234.        3M does not question

that these disclosures constitute "other paper[s]" under § 1446(b)

but nevertheless argues that these disclosures did not clearly

indicate potential commingling between MilSpec AFFF PFAS and non-

AFFF PFAS.

            We need not decide whether the district court was correct

to rely on these three documents in its timeliness analysis.                 This

is so because New Hampshire entered other papers into the record

of this case, more than thirty days before 3M removed, making clear

that 3M allegedly contaminated the natural resources at issue in

this case with both MilSpec AFFF PFAS and non-AFFF PFAS.


                                    - 13 -
            On November 21, 2019, New Hampshire filed in state court

a memorandum in support of an omnibus objection to motions to

dismiss this case.        In that memorandum, New Hampshire described

its complaint in this lawsuit as "one for statewide contamination."

And it explained that the "[s]tatewide contamination" for which it

seeks recovery in this lawsuit "is not geographically limited" but

is instead "pervasive across the natural resources of the State."

This    filing    thus   made     explicit    what    the    complaint    (which

underscored the "widespread contamination" of natural resources

"throughout      New   Hampshire")    only    strongly      implied:   that   New

Hampshire seeks recovery in this case for statewide PFAS pollution

pervasive throughout its natural resources.

            Of course, New Hampshire's allegation of statewide non-

AFFF PFAS did not by itself make clear that New Hampshire's non-

AFFF claims would, in 3M's words, "encompass and overlap with

claims to recover for PFAS contamination caused at least in part

by MilSpec [AFFF]."         To allege such an overlap, 3M needed to

receive a paper that, when added to the other documents in this

case,    demonstrated      that    MilSpec     AFFF     contributed      to   the

contamination of at least some of the statewide natural resources

at issue.

            New Hampshire's November 2019 memorandum largely filled

that gap.    In it, New Hampshire stated:            "To the extent the State

expressly disclaims relief related to [AFFF], the State brought a


                                     - 14 -
separate lawsuit, naming the same three defendants in addition to

manufacturers   of   AFFF,    exclusively    related    to   contamination

resulting from AFFF, which is disclosed in the Complaint."              New

Hampshire   continued:       "[Defendants]    are     well-aware   of   that

lawsuit, which was filed in this same court on the same day as the

instant lawsuit, which suit has since been removed to federal court

and   transferred    for     pre-trial     purposes    to    multi-district

litigation pending in the District of South Carolina."             Thus, as

of November 21, 2019, New Hampshire had also informed 3M that 3M's

AFFF had contaminated New Hampshire's natural resources and that

that contamination was being litigated in an MDL in the District

of South Carolina.

            Subsequently, on February 21, 2020, New Hampshire filed

as an exhibit in this case in state court a transcript of a

discovery-update hearing from the South Carolina MDL.           In relevant

part, the transcript shows the parties and court discussing their

efforts to conduct discovery into the issue of what 3M told "the

Government and what . . . the Government kn[e]w independently"

about the dangers of MilSpec AFFF.         The parties further explained

that "MilSpec" is short for "[m]ilitary specification" and that an

official at the Naval Sea Systems Command is "responsible for,

ultimately, approving all changes to the military specification."

In other words, the MDL transcript -- a paper provided by New

Hampshire in this case -- informed 3M that the company produced


                                  - 15 -
per federal government specification at least some of the AFFF

that New Hampshire alleges has contaminated its natural resources.

             Together,    these    documents       made    clear    long    before

March 30, 2022, that New Hampshire was alleging both that (1) this

lawsuit     seeks    recovery    from   3M   for    statewide      non-AFFF   PFAS

throughout New Hampshire's natural resources, and (2) MilSpec AFFF

PFAS attributable to 3M contaminated some of New Hampshire's

statewide natural resources.            These facts would have alerted a

party exercising "a reasonable amount of intelligence," Romulus,

770 F.3d at 75, that a factfinder would need to decide whether and

to   what   extent    "certain    PFAS . . .       came   from   [MilSpec     AFFF]

or . . . non-AFFF products," Maryland v. 3M Co., Nos. 24-1218, 24-

1270, 2025 WL 727831, at *6 (4th Cir. Mar. 7, 2025).

             3M nevertheless argues that, in June 2022, New Hampshire

stated, in opposing the consolidation of the Non-AFFF Suit in the

South Carolina MDL, that the AFFF Suit and Non-AFFF Suit do not

involve overlapping sites.         But 3M never made this argument to the

district court.       And 3M does not explain how a statement made well

after the case became clearly removable somehow retroactively

belied that removability.         This argument is therefore waived.           See

United States v. Zannino, 895 F.2d 1, 17 (1st Cir. 1990).

             Separately, 3M contends that the removal clock did not

begin until New Hampshire identified a specific site allegedly

cross-contaminated with non-AFFF PFAS and MilSpec AFFF PFAS.                   But


                                    - 16 -
the alleged presence of         any commingling requires              a court to

determine whether and to what extent MilSpec AFFF produced by 3M

caused a portion of the contamination at issue.                  Thus, once New

Hampshire alleged facts indicating some commingling in the state,

this   case    became    plainly     removable      under      3M's   theory   of

removability without any need to then identify a specific site

with cross-contamination.

                                 *      *       *

             New Hampshire filed the MDL status hearing transcript as

an exhibit in this case on February 21, 2020.                   When considered

with   New     Hampshire's      allegations         of   statewide       non-AFFF

contamination     in    its   natural       resources,   the    status   hearing

transcript made clear that New Hampshire was plausibly alleging

that non-AFFF PFAS and MilSpec AFFF PFAS had commingled at some of

the sites for which it seeks recovery in this case.              Thus, assuming

that the nexus requirement was satisfied once it became apparent

that a court would have to adjudicate the presence and extent of

MilSpec AFFF PFAS, we hold that 3M needed to file its removal

notice by March 23, 2020.        It did not do so until April 29, 2022.

The notice was therefore untimely.

                                        V.

             For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the district

court is affirmed and the case should remain where the district

court sent it -- in state court.


                                     - 17 -