23-721-cv
Suluki v. Credit One Bank, NA


                                UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
                                    FOR THE SECOND CIRCUIT



                                       August Term 2023

                     (Argued: June 26, 2024 Decided: May 28, 2025)

                                      Docket No. 23-721-cv



                                       KHALILAH SULUKI,
                                                    Plaintiff-Appellant,

                                               v.

                                     CREDIT ONE BANK, NA,
                                                    Defendant-Appellee,

                   CAPITAL ONE BANK, NA, COMENITY CAPITAL BANK,
                                             Defendants.



                  ON APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                      FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK



              Before:           CHIN, SULLIVAN, and ROBINSON, Circuit Judges.



                Appeal from a judgment of the United States District Court for the

Southern District of New York (Stein, J.) dismissing plaintiff-appellant's claims
under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, which alleged that defendant-appellee bank

failed to conduct a reasonable investigation into her dispute claiming identity

theft committed by her mother. Plaintiff contends that a reasonable investigation

would have led to a finding that the account was fraudulent. The district court

granted summary judgment to the bank, concluding first that, putting aside the

actual reasonableness of the bank's investigation, no reasonable investigation

required by the statute would have yielded a different result; and second that

plaintiff did not present any triable issues of fact as to whether the bank willfully

or negligently violated the statute so as to be liable to her for damages.

             AFFIRMED.




                          ALISA TIWARI (Matthew W.H. Wessler, on the brief),
                                Gupta Wessler LLP, Washington, DC; Leonard A.
                                Bennett and Craig Carley Marchiando, on the brief,
                                Consumer Litigation Associates, P.C., Newport
                                News, VA; and Abel L. Pierre, on the brief, Law
                                Office of Abel L. Pierre, P.C., New York, NY, for
                                Plaintiff-Appellant.

                          HEIDI E. SIEGMUND (Matthew A. Fitzgerald, Philip A.
                                Goldstein, and Jarrod D. Shaw, on the brief),
                                McGuireWoods LLP, New York, NY, Richmond,
                                VA, and Pittsburgh, PA, for Defendant-Appellee.




                                          2
                          RYAN COOPER, Senior Counsel (Steven Y. Bressler,
                               Deputy General Counsel, Kristin Bateman,
                               Assistant General Counsel, and Seth Frotman,
                               General Counsel, on the brief), Washington, DC,
                               for Amicus Curiae Consumer Financial Protection
                               Bureau; and Anisha S. Dasgupta, General
                               Counsel, Mariel Goetz, Acting Director of
                               Litigation, and Bradley Dax Grossman, Attorney,
                               Washington, DC, on the brief, for Amicus Curiae
                               Federal Trade Commission, in support of Plaintiff-
                               Appellant.

CHIN, Circuit Judge:

             In this case, a daughter alleges that her mother stole her identity to

fraudulently open and use a credit card account in her name. Plaintiff-appellant

Khalilah Suluki ("Suluki") claims that her mother, Khadijah Suluki ("Khadijah"),

opened several credit card accounts in her name without her permission at

various banks, including defendant-appellee Credit One Bank, N.A. ("Credit

One"). Upon discovering the alleged fraud, Suluki disputed the account both by

calling Credit One and by notifying the three major national credit reporting

agencies (the "CRAs"): Equifax, Experian, and Trans Union.

             Credit One investigated her dispute multiple times. Its investigators

concluded that the account was legitimate and that it belonged to Suluki. Suluki

filed suit, alleging, inter alia, that Credit One violated the Fair Credit Reporting




                                          3
Act (the "FCRA"), 15 U.S.C. § 1681 et seq., by failing to conduct a reasonable

investigation into her dispute. See 15 U.S.C. § 1681s-2(b)(1).

             The parties cross-moved for summary judgment. The district court

denied Suluki's motion and granted summary judgment in favor of Credit One.

Suluki v. Credit One Bank, NA, 666 F. Supp. 3d 403, 409-10, 412-15 (S.D.N.Y. 2023).

The court concluded that, even though there were genuine issues of material fact

as to the accuracy of the information reported and the reasonableness of Credit

One's investigations, summary judgment in Credit One's favor was still

appropriate because no reasonable jury could find that any reasonable

investigation would have led Credit One to determine that the account was

fraudulent or that the information was unverifiable. See id. at 410-14. The district

court also concluded that Suluki could not recover damages because she did not

present evidence from which a reasonable jury could find that Credit One

willfully or negligently violated the FCRA. Id. at 412-15.

             On appeal, Suluki contends that the district court erred principally

in two ways: first, by concluding that Credit One would not have come to a

different conclusion had it conducted a reasonable investigation, and second, in

holding that Credit One did not willfully violate the FCRA. Suluki accuses




                                         4
Credit One of taking a "cookie-cutter" approach to investigating her dispute by

concluding its inquiry after it found only two "superficial links" between her and

the account. Plaintiff-Appellant Br. at 27. She claims that, had Credit One

conducted what she considers to be a reasonable investigation, it would have

concluded that Khadijah stole Suluki's identity to create and use the account, or

that the information was at least unverifiable.

            We are not persuaded. The FCRA requires furnishers to conduct

investigations into consumer disputes, but it does not guarantee that the results

of those investigations will favor the consumer lodging the dispute. And to that

end, the FCRA does not require furnishers to conduct perfect investigations -- it

requires only that furnishers conduct reasonable investigations.

            We agree with the district court that there is a genuine issue of

material fact as to whether the information on Suluki's credit report is accurate,

i.e., whether Khadijah indeed opened and used the account without Suluki's

permission, as Suluki and Khadijah provided conflicting statements. Even

assuming, however, that Khadijah opened the account in Suluki's name without

her daughter's permission, we conclude that no reasonable investigation into

Suluki's claim would have led Credit One to a different conclusion. And,




                                         5
because we also determine as a matter of law that even assuming the FCRA was

violated, no jury could conclude that the violation was willful or negligent,

Suluki is not entitled to damages.

             Accordingly, we AFFIRM the judgment of the district court.

                                   BACKGROUND

I.    The Facts 1

      A.     The Credit One Account

             At some point prior to her beginning college in 2014, Suluki

discussed with Khadijah opening a credit card account in Suluki's name so that

she could begin building credit. Following Khadijah's advice, Suluki applied for

her first credit card with Discover Bank when she began college. Khadijah

helped Suluki prepare for the application process and was present when Suluki

applied for the card. Khadijah also assisted Suluki when she applied for other

credit cards at retail stores like Century 21 and American Eagle. Suluki made

payments on her credit cards using money that Khadijah sent her while she was




1
     We present the facts in the light most favorable to Suluki, with all factual
ambiguities resolved and all reasonable inferences drawn in her favor. See Martinez v.
Agway Energy Servs., LLC, 88 F.4th 401, 406 n.2 (2d Cir. 2023).

                                           6
away at college. Khadijah also opened a Credit One account with Suluki's sister,

Taheerah, so that Taheerah could build her credit as well.

             On November 2, 2017, an individual filled out an online form to

open a credit card with Credit One. The applicant input Suluki's name,

birthdate, the address of her childhood home in Brooklyn, her Social Security

number, and the email address "ksuluki@yahoo.com." J. App'x at 218. The card

was first used in December 2017, in Brooklyn, and remained open for over 18

months. Account statements show that the card was most often used for

miscellaneous purchases at retail stores and restaurants in the Brooklyn area.

Every month, someone made minimum or partial payments on the card from a

Chase bank account that Suluki and Khadijah shared. In August 2020, after

Suluki had alleged identity theft and disputed her account, the card's balance

was paid in full.

      B.     Suluki's Allegations of Identity Theft

             In July 2019, Suluki applied to rent an apartment and was rejected. 2

That denial prompted her to take a closer look at her credit, and she pulled credit



2      In March 2019, three months before Suluki discovered the alleged fraud, she and
her family went on vacation to Puerto Rico for her birthday. During the trip, Suluki and
her family got into a fight. Upon their return, Khadijah kicked Suluki out of the family
home.

                                           7
reports from Experian, Equifax, and Trans Union. Upon reviewing the reports,

she was "dismayed to discover that while she was attending college, she was the

victim of identity theft, as [Khadijah] opened various accounts in [Suluki's] name

and maxed out some of [Suluki's] pre-existing accounts." Id. at 10. One of those

accounts was a Credit One card.

             On July 6, 2019, Suluki called Credit One to report that she had not

opened the account. She stated that she did not know who opened the account.

She initially gave the representative a different telephone number than the one

associated with the account, but then was able to confirm that her mother's

telephone number was the number for the account. The representative advised

her that there was a balance on the account of $562.47, and he confirmed with her

that she was filing a report indicating that the card was on a fraudulent account

for which she had not applied. At some point thereafter, Suluki advised Credit

One that her mother used her information to open the account without her

permission or knowledge. 3 Credit One closed Suluki's account "in accordance




3      Suluki's briefs on appeal do not explain what motive Khadijah could have had
for opening cards in Suluki's name without her permission. But at her deposition,
Suluki stated that "money has always been a problem" and speculated that Khadijah
may have done it to fund an Airbnb she was building in her house. J. App'x at 57.

                                          8
with its normal policy." Id. at 211. It opened an investigation and requested that

she obtain a police report. 4

             Suluki visited the precinct on West 8th Street in Coney Island to file

a police report, but officers told her she could not file a report without certain

paperwork from Credit One. As a result of this "back and forth," Suluki decided

not to obtain a report. Id. at 58-59. By the end of the summer, she had called

Credit One "two, maybe three" times to report the fraud, and she retained a

lawyer. Id. at 57.

             At some point after Suluki reported the identity theft, Credit One

called Khadijah and left her messages. In response, Khadijah called Credit One

on July 25, 2019, and told Credit One that the account was not fraudulent.

Khadijah told the Credit One representative that she and Suluki opened the

account together when Suluki was in college, with the understanding that

Khadijah would make payments on the card to assist Suluki with building her

credit. Khadijah told the representative that there was no forgery or fraud, that



4
       The record includes a transcript of a call that Suluki made to Credit One on July
6, 2019, as well as a recording of part of a telephone call that Suluki made to Credit One
on July 20, 2019. In neither call, as reflected in the transcript and recording,
respectively, does Suluki explicitly accuse her mother of fraudulently opening the
account. As discussed below, she did identify her mother as a suspect in later
correspondence.

                                            9
she had been paying the amount due every month, and would remain

responsible for paying off the account balance. The representative advised her

that the account had already been closed and that the outstanding balance was

$562.47.

             On August 15, 2019, in response to Suluki's allegations, Credit One

requested information from her and provided a form affidavit for her to

complete. The letter also asked for a copy of an "Identity Theft Report" filed

"with [Suluki's] local police department (or another Federal, State, or Local law

enforcement agency) or the U.S. Postal Inspector." Id. at 140. On August 29,

2019, Suluki completed and submitted the affidavit but did not provide an

identity theft report. She represented in the affidavit that "I did not apply for this

credit card, nor . . . was I aware of these charges." Id. at 141. She identified the

"suspect" as "Khadijah Suluki," but then filled in her own name and social

security number in the blank below. Id.

             On November 10, 2019, apparently with the assistance of her

attorneys, Suluki sent letters to Experian, Equifax, and Trans Union disputing the

portion of her credit report that included her Credit One account. The letters

stated, in pertinent part:




                                          10
       My mother used my information and opened accounts in my name
       without me ever agreeing to that. She opened a century 21 account
       with my information. She did this when I was away at college.
       That's why she was able to get the card and use it . . . . My mother
       also opened a Credit One account. The C21 account was used
       [without] my consent.

Id. at 144. 5 Suluki did not attach an identity theft report to the CRA dispute

letters.

             On April 28, 2020, Suluki disputed her account again by sending

another round of dispute letters to the CRAs. The letters stated that Khadijah

"opened up a capital one and credit one account" and "never made the charges or

used the century 21 account." Id. at 194. Suluki, however, did not include new

information or an identity theft report. Id.

             In the meantime, Credit One continued to receive regular and, for

the most part, timely payments on the account until it was paid off in full in

August 2020.

       C.    Credit One's Investigations

             Credit One's notes recording the activity in the account (the "Notes")

confirm that Credit One received a call on July 6, 2019 from Suluki. The call


5
      The above-quoted language comes from the copy of the letter Suluki sent to
Experian. Suluki sent the "same exact packet" to Trans Union and Equifax. J. App'x at
62.

                                          11
triggered an investigation, which resulted in the conclusion that the cardholder,

that is, Suluki, was "responsible" for the account. Id. at 273. The Notes confirm

that Suluki called again on July 20, 2019, and advised that she had not opened

the account. They confirm further that Khadijah called on July 25, 2019,

identifying herself as the "mother" and saying she would take responsibility for

the balance due on the account. Id. The Notes show further investigation by

Credit One, including after receiving Suluki's affidavit of fraud. Finally, the

Notes indicate that Suluki was sent a letter on or about September 17, 2019,

advising her that she was deemed responsible for the account.

             There were additional investigations, as Credit One received notice

of Suluki's disputes from the CRAs via an automated computer dispute

verification ("ACDV"). An ACDV "is an automated request to verify, update, or

delete trade line information in a consumer's credit report." Id. at 213. Consumer

disputes submitted through ACDVs are transmitted to CRAs, who then convey

them to furnishers. It is Credit One's policy to investigate "each ACDV that

claims fraud." Id. 6



6
       Some Credit One fraud investigators are Credit One employees, and others are
third-party vendors who Credit One hires and trains in their fraud investigation
procedures. John Perry, a Credit One fraud specialist whose investigation of Suluki's



                                          12
             Credit One received six ACDVs from the CRAs relating to Suluki's

disputes -- four within nearly a week of each other in November 2019 and two a

few days apart in May 2020. Where multiple identical disputes are received via

an ACDV within a 30-day period, Credit One generally conducts a full

investigation on the first ACDV, and relies on the results of that investigation to

resolve subsequent identical disputes.

             Credit One employees John Perry and Adoria Reaux conducted

investigations of the disputes received from the CRAs on November 29, 2019,

and May 13, 2020, respectively. All investigations into Suluki's dispute followed

the same procedure, and all investigators concluded that there was no fraud.

              Once a Credit One investigator receives a dispute based on identity

theft, he or she conducts the investigation by reviewing (1) the ACDV itself,

including the dispute code at issue; (2) all documents that accompany the ACDV;

(3) information from Credit One's databases; and (4) information about the

consumer available through databases like Experian and LexisNexis ("Lexis").

Credit One's policy instructed investigators to use "both internal and external



dispute we discuss in more detail below, testified that he and all other Credit One fraud
investigators receive about two weeks of "classroom-style training" upon hiring,
"training required by law of the yearly annual updates," and biweekly meetings during
which investigators are alerted to any new policies or procedures. J. App'x at 155.

                                           13
sources" to "identify any potential links to the person(s) committing fraudulent

activity." Id. at 204 (noting that "[a]t least two strong links are required when

holding a consumer responsible" and "[l]inks should always be relevant to the

consumer's claim"). The Notes are also available for the investigators to review.

             When Perry reviewed Suluki's November 29, 2019 dispute after

receiving notice from Experian, he began by reviewing the ACDV and the

dispute code attached to it. The dispute code "103" indicated that Suluki was

alleging that her Credit One account was fraudulently opened. Id. at 199-200.

He then reviewed the documents that Experian transmitted with the ACDV. In

this case, those documents included Suluki's dispute letter and "illegible" copies

of her driver's license and Social Security card. Id. at 200.

             Perry then reviewed information pertaining to Suluki and her

account in Credit One's internal databases, confirming that the Social Security

information Suluki provided in her ACDV matched the number on her account.

He reviewed Credit One's application database, which has a "fraud" tab for each

application received. The fraud tab reflects an Early Warning Services ("EWS")

score, which is a third-party data point that predicts fraudulent activity. A

higher score can indicate fraudulent activity; the EWS score on Suluki's count




                                          14
was zero. The fraud tab also contains "Precise ID Fraud Shield Indicators" for

each account -- another metric of potential fraudulent activity. Id. If there are

more than three "T" indicators present, Credit One investigators initiate "an

especially careful and thorough investigation." Id. Here, there were only two "T"

indicators present.

             Credit One's application database included a "Red Flag" tab, which

"indicates whether any phone numbers or e-mail addresses associated with a

particular application . . . were also used on any other Credit One applications."

Id. If the "Red Flag" tab shows other applications used the same identifiers as the

disputed account or fraudulent activity associated with accounts linked to those

identifiers, then investigators are alerted that the disputed account may also be

fraudulent. Here, the "Red Flag" tab showed that the phone number and email

address were associated with Taheerah's account but did not otherwise flag any

suspicious activity or indicators of fraud, and Taheerah's account was open and

current.

             Finding no initial red flags or other indicators of fraud, Perry next

reviewed the payment history on the account. He noted that the account had a

"history of payments," and that "[i]n [his] experience, consistent on-time




                                         15
payments are highly unusual in identity theft cases." Id. at 201. He also observed

that there were no disputed charges on the account. Searching Credit One's

phone database, Perry noted that the same phone number listed on the

application was used to open the account, and had been used for payments.

               After conducting a review of Credit One's internal databases, Perry

used Lexis to verify the information -- the Social Security number, address, and

phone number -- associated with Suluki's account. The Lexis search established

that Suluki's association with the address and phone number on the account

predated the opening of the account. Based on the above findings, Perry

"determined that the evidence supported a finding that Ms. Suluki was

responsible for the Account." Id. at 202. Accordingly, he responded to the

ACDV that Credit One's reporting was accurate.

               Reaux's investigation into the April 2020 dispute was substantially

similar to Perry's. After she independently followed Credit One's procedures,

she reached the same conclusion that there was no fraud and Suluki was deemed

responsible.




                                          16
II.   Proceedings Below

             On February 9, 2021, Suluki filed a complaint (the "Complaint") in

the district court below against Capital One Bank, Comenity Capital Bank, and

Credit One, alleging violations of the FCRA. On April 8, 2021, Credit One

answered the Complaint. Suluki voluntarily dismissed her claims against

Capital One and Comenity Bank on September 22, 2021, and on October 14, 2021,

respectively.

             After the parties engaged in discovery, Suluki moved for summary

judgment contending that: (1) Credit One's reporting to the CRAs that the

account belonged to Suluki was inaccurate as a matter of law; (2) Credit One

failed to properly report the results of its investigation to the CRAs; and (3)

Credit One's investigation of her identity theft claim was unreasonable as a

matter of law. Credit One moved for summary judgment contending that: (1) its

investigation was reasonable as a matter of law; and (2) whether or not its

investigation was reasonable, it did not act willfully and therefore damages were

unwarranted.

             The district court denied Suluki's motion and granted Credit One's.

See Suluki, 666 F. Supp. 3d at 410, 412. The court held that there was a genuine




                                         17
issue of material fact as to whether the information was accurate, and

accordingly it denied Suluki's motion for summary judgment on accuracy. Id. at

409-11. The court also denied Suluki's motion for summary judgment to the

extent she argued that Credit One's investigation was unreasonable as a matter

of law. Id. at 412.

             The district court, however, granted Credit One's motion for

summary judgment on the basis of causation, concluding that no reasonable jury

could find that, had Credit One conducted a reasonable investigation, its

investigators could have concluded that Suluki was not responsible for the

account. Id. at 412-15; see id. at 414 ("Suluki has not presented any facts showing

that, had Credit One taken any of the additional steps she urges, it would have

come to a different conclusion."). In so holding, the district court also rejected

Suluki's claims that Credit One willfully or negligently violated the FCRA and

concluded therefore that she was not entitled to damages. Id. at 414-15.

             This appeal followed.




                                         18
                                    DISCUSSION

I.    The Applicable Law

      A.     Standard of Review

             "We review a district court's grant of summary judgment de novo

where the parties filed cross-motions for summary judgment and the district

court granted one motion but denied the other." Zhang Jingrong v. Chinese Anti-

Cult World Alliance Inc., 16 F.4th 47, 56 (2d Cir. 2021) (quoting Atlas Air, Inc. v.

Int'l Bhd. of Teamsters, 943 F.3d 568, 576-77 (2d Cir. 2019)). "We evaluate each

party's motion on its own merits, taking care in each instance to draw all

reasonable inferences against the party whose motion is under consideration."

Byrne v. Rutledge, 623 F.3d 46, 53 (2d Cir. 2010) (internal citation and quotation

marks omitted). We may affirm the grant of summary judgment in favor of one

party only if we conclude that on the record presented, considered in the light

most favorable to the other party, no reasonable jury could have found in favor

of the latter. Zhang Jingrong, 16 F.4th at 56-57. Summary judgment is proper, and

we will affirm, where "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to

any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed.

R. Civ. P. 56(a).




                                           19
       B.        The FCRA

                 Congress enacted the FCRA "to ensure fair and accurate credit

reporting, promote efficiency in the banking system, and protect consumer

privacy." Safeco Ins. Co. of Am. v. Burr, 551 U.S. 47, 52 (2007). The FCRA places

obligations on three distinct entities in the consumer-lending ecosystem:

furnishers of consumer credit information to CRAs, the CRAs themselves, and

users of consumer credit reports. Furnishers include banks, card issuers, and

other financial institutions that transmit information relating to debts owed by

consumers to CRAs for reporting. See Galper v. JP Morgan Chase Bank, NA, 802

F.3d 437, 445 (2d Cir. 2015). Furnishers of consumer information are subject to

obligations under Sections 1681s-2(a) and (b). Section 1681s-2(b) is relevant to

this appeal. 7




7
       Section 1681s-2(a) provides that where a consumer disputes the accuracy of
information on her credit report, furnishers "may not furnish the information to any
consumer reporting agency without notice that such information is disputed by the
consumer." 15 U.S.C. § 1681s-2(a)(3). The FCRA explicitly bars private rights of action
to enforce Section 1681s-2(a). See id. § 1681s-2(d); Longman v. Wachovia Bank, N.A., 702
F.3d 148, 151 (2d Cir. 2012) ("[T]he statute plainly restricts enforcement of [section
1681s-2(a)] to federal and state authorities."). Accordingly, the district court properly
held that Suluki cannot bring a claim against Credit One for failing to report to the
CRAs that Suluki disputed the account. Suluki, 666 F. Supp. 3d at 411-12. Suluki does
not challenge this ruling on appeal.

                                            20
              Section 1681s-2(b) governs a furnisher's duty to investigate after

receiving notice of a consumer dispute from a CRA. 15 U.S.C. § 1681s-2(b). 8

When a consumer disputes the accuracy of their credit report with a CRA, the

CRA must provide the furnisher with "all relevant information" regarding the

dispute. 15 U.S.C. § 1681i(a)(2)(A). Once the CRA notifies the furnisher that

there is a dispute, the furnisher must (1) investigate the disputed information;

(2) report the results of the investigation to the CRA; and (3) take corrective steps

if the information is inaccurate, incomplete, or impossible to verify. 15 U.S.C.

§ 1681s-2(b)(1).

              Notably, Section 1681s-2(b) does not set out guidelines for the

furnisher's investigation, as it merely provides that the furnisher "shall . . .

conduct an investigation with respect to the disputed information." 15 U.S.C.

§ 1681s-2(b)(1)(A). Courts, including ours, however, have read into the section a

reasonableness requirement. Longman, 702 F.3d at 151 (noting that furnishers

have a "duty to reasonably investigate and verify that the information is




8
       This duty arises only when the furnisher receives notice of a dispute from a CRA.
See Sprague v. Salisbury Bank & Tr. Co., 969 F.3d 95, 99 (2d Cir. 2020); see also SimmsParris
v. Countrywide Fin. Corp., 652 F.3d 355, 358 (3d Cir. 2011) ("Notice under § 1681i(a)(2)
must be given by a credit reporting agency, and cannot come directly from the
consumer.").

                                             21
accurate"); accord Johnson v. MBNA Am. Bank, NA, 357 F.3d 426, 431 (4th Cir.

2004); Gorman v. Wolpoff & Abramson, LLP, 584 F.3d 1147, 1157 (9th Cir. 2009);

Felts v. Wells Fargo Bank, NA, 893 F.3d 1305, 1312 (11th Cir. 2018) ("The

appropriate touchstone for evaluating a furnisher's investigation under [Section]

1681s-2(b) is reasonableness." (internal citation and quotation marks omitted)).

             We have not elaborated on what it means to conduct a reasonable

investigation, but the question is not a complicated one. "[A] reasonable

procedure is one 'that a reasonably prudent person would undertake under the

circumstances.'" Seamans v. Temple Univ., 744 F.3d 853, 864 (3d Cir. 2014). This

inquiry is fact-dependent and turns in part on "what [the furnisher] learned

about the nature of the dispute from the description in the CRA's notice of

dispute." Frederick v. Capital One Bank (USA), N.A., No. 14-CV-5460 (AJN), 2018

WL 1583289, at *7 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 27, 2018) (alteration in original) (quoting

Gorman, 584 F.3d at 1157); see also, e.g., Chiang v. Verizon New England Inc., 595

F.3d 26, 38 (1st Cir. 2010). The provided description, however, should not

"cabin[] the scope of the investigation once undertaken." Gorman, 584 F.3d at

1157 n.11. "[T]he term 'investigation' itself denotes a 'fairly searching inquiry,' or

at least something more than a merely cursory review." Boggio v. USAA Fed. Sav.




                                          22
Bank, 696 F.3d 611, 616 (6th Cir. 2012) (citing Gorman, 584 F.3d at 1155-57);

Johnson, 357 F.3d at 430-31.

             Considering this context-dependent inquiry, reasonableness is

"generally a question for a finder of fact," Gorman, 584 F.3d at 1161; see also Hinkle

v. Midland Credit Mgmt., Inc., 827 F.3d 1295, 1303 (11th Cir. 2016) ("[T]he question

of whether the furnisher behaved reasonably . . . is a factual question, and it will

normally be reserved for trial."). Summary judgment in favor of the furnisher,

however, is appropriate where no reasonable factfinder could conclude that the

investigation was unreasonable. See Gorman, 584 F.3d at 1157.

             Even assuming an investigation is not reasonable, courts have also

concluded that summary judgment in favor of the furnisher is appropriate if a

reasonable investigation would not have yielded a different result. See Felts, 893

F.3d at 1313 ("[A] plaintiff asserting a claim against a furnisher for failure to

conduct a reasonable investigation cannot prevail on the claim without

demonstrating that had the furnisher conducted a reasonable investigation, the

result would have been different." (emphasis in original)); Frazier v. Dovenmuehle

Mortg., Inc., 72 F.4th 769, 775, 776 n.3 (7th Cir. 2023) (collecting cases).




                                           23
             In essence, a court granting summary judgment to a furnisher after

concluding that no reasonable investigation would have yielded a different

outcome does so based on causation; if there is no genuine dispute of material

fact about whether a reasonable investigation would have revealed the

inaccuracy of the disputed information, then there is no nexus between the

furnisher's unreasonable investigation and the inaccuracy that caused the

plaintiff damages. See Chiang, 595 F.3d at 41 (noting that FCRA plaintiff was

"required to present evidence of actual inaccuracies in his account that an

alternative investigation might have uncovered"); see also Casella v. Equifax Credit

Info. Servs., 56 F.3d 469, 474–75 (2d Cir. 1995) (holding that FCRA plaintiff must

show "causation between the harm alleged" and the "alleged violation[] of the

FCRA").

             To recover damages, a plaintiff must show that the violation of the

FCRA was willful or negligent. A defendant who willfully violates the FCRA is

liable for actual damages, punitive damages, and attorneys' fees. 15 U.S.C.

§ 1681n(a). A defendant who negligently violates the FCRA is liable only for

actual damages and attorneys’ fees. 15 U.S.C. § 1681o.




                                         24
II.   Application

             Like the district court, we do not reach the issue of whether Credit

One correctly determined that Suluki was responsible for the account because

there was no fraud. On this record, we agree there is a genuine issue of material

fact as to the accuracy of the determination. See Suluki, 666 F. Supp. 3d at 410.

The conflicting testimony from Suluki, Khadijah, and Taheerah creates a genuine

issue of fact as to whether Khadijah opened the account with Suluki's permission

or whether she did so without Suluki's knowledge and consent.

             Even assuming the information provided by Credit One was

inaccurate, however, the inaccuracy was not, by itself, sufficient to create liability

under the FCRA, for the FCRA "is not a strict liability statute." Obabueki v.

Choicepoint, Inc., 236 F. Supp. 2d 278, 285 (S.D.N.Y. 2002); accord Abdallah v.

LexisNexis Risk Sols. FL Inc., No. 19-CV-3609 (MKB), 2021 WL 6197060, at *6

(E.D.N.Y. December 30, 2021) ("[M]erely reporting inaccurate information is

insufficient to give rise to liability under the FCRA, as the Act is not a strict

liability statute."). The FCRA simply requires a reasonable investigation, and a

furnisher is not liable for reporting inaccurate information unless its

investigation was not reasonable. Moreover, even where an investigation turns




                                          25
out to be unreasonable, a plaintiff asserting a claim against a furnisher must still

"demonstrat[e] that had the furnisher conducted a reasonable investigation, the

result would have been different, i.e., that the furnisher would have discovered

that the information it reported was inaccurate or incomplete." Felts, 893 F.3d at

1313. Without such a showing, "a plaintiff's claim against a furnisher necessarily

fails, as the plaintiff would be unable to demonstrate any injury from the

allegedly deficient investigation." Id.

             Both parties moved for summary judgment as to whether Credit

One's investigation was reasonable. The district court concluded that "there [is] a

factual dispute about the adequacy of the steps taken by Credit One to

investigate Suluki's claims." Suluki, 666 F. Supp. 3d at 413. We do not reach the

question of whether Credit One's investigation was reasonable as a matter of

law, because we hold, as the district court held, id. at 414, that no reasonable

investigation into Suluki's claims would have led Credit One to reach a different

conclusion about Suluki's account. We likewise hold that no reasonable jury

could find that Credit One willfully violated the FCRA, thereby precluding an

award of punitive damages for Credit One's purportedly unreasonable

investigation.




                                          26
      A.     Causation

             Even assuming there are genuine issues of fact as to the

reasonableness of Credit One's investigation, Suluki has not shown the existence

of a genuine issue of fact as to whether a reasonable investigation would have

uncovered additional evidence that would have led Credit One to determine that

Khadijah opened the account in Suluki's name without her permission. See Felts,

893 F.3d at 1313.

             On appeal, Suluki contends that Credit One failed to consider

various pieces of information – "[her] affidavit, direct links to [Khadijah] in the

account information, and evidence that [Khadijah] was actively using the credit

card" – that would have resulted in a different investigative result. Plaintiff-

Appellant's Br. at 33. We disagree.

             For starters, the record unequivocally shows that Credit One did

review this evidence. The Notes make several references in August and

September of 2019 to the receipt of the "affidavit of fraud," and Credit One's

policy (which Perry followed) requires its investigators to "[r]eview . . . an

affidavit [that] was received in relation to the claim." J. App'x at 206.




                                          27
             But even assuming the Credit One investigators overlooked this

evidence, a reasonable jury could not have concluded that Credit One would

have reached a different result. First, the affidavit was flawed on its face due to

Suluki's failure to follow the affidavit's instructions. Both Credit One's cover

letter and the affidavit itself instructed Suluki to provide "an identity theft

report" that had been submitted to law enforcement. J. App'x at 140 (cover letter

stating "you are required to file an identity theft report with your local police

department (or another Federal, State, or Local law enforcement agency) or the

U.S. Postal Inspector"); id. at 141 (affidavit warning that the "Identity Theft

Report filed with law enforcement . . . must be provided with this affidavit"

(emphasis in original)). Yet despite such explicit instructions, Suluki did not

submit the identity theft report. Suluki also failed to follow the affidavit's

express directive to "initial all transaction(s) not authorized by [her]." Id. at 141

(emphasis in original). Even in the section where she was supposed to include

the name of the suspected fraudster, she wrote both her and Khadijah's name

and then listed her own social security number instead of Khadijah's. See id. On




                                           28
the basis of such an error-ridden affidavit, no reasonable investigator would

have concluded that Suluki was not responsible for the account. 9

              Second, it cannot be said that the "direct links" between Khadijah

and the account necessarily suggested fraud. It is true, as Suluki points out, that

the phone number, physical address, and email address connected to the account

belonged to Khadijah. But both the phone number and physical address were

also associated with Suluki. Even the email address on its face

(ksuluki@yahoo.com) suggests that it belonged to (Khalilah) Suluki. And while

Suluki stresses that Khadijah made payments for the account from her own

phone and that Credit One possessed the recordings of those calls, the fact

remains that Khadijah was making payments from a joint account to which both

she and Suluki had access. See id. at 53 (Suluki testifying that the payments on

the card came from the joint account that she shared with Khadijah). Suluki's

arguments in no way obscure the fact that payments were made regularly and on




9      Though not binding precedent, DeSiena v. Pennsylvania Higher Educ. Assistance
Agency, No. 22-1956, 2023 WL 4044109 (2d Cir. June 16, 2023) (summary order),
supports our conclusion. There, a panel of this Court affirmed the district court's grant
of summary judgment in a furnisher's favor, concluding that "an affidavit [by the
consumer] stating that she did not sign for the Loan . . . without more, does not
demonstrate that the [furnisher] failed to conduct a reasonable investigation." Id. at *2.
(internal citation and quotation marks omitted).

                                            29
time by a person related to her from a joint account to which she had access.

Ultimately, a reasonable investigator would not rely on these “direct links” to

conclude that someone other than Suluki was responsible for the account.

             Third, the purchase details and payment history do not compel a

different conclusion. As Credit One notes in its brief, most of the purchases on

the account were consistent with a purchaser matching Suluki's demographic: a

college-aged female from Brooklyn. In fact, many of the purchases on the

account were made at retail stores in Brooklyn, such as American Eagle, Adidas,

and Uniqlo. See, e.g., id. at 233 (bill showing purchase at American Eagle

Outfitters); id. at 243 (purchase at Uniqlo); id. at 249 (transaction at Adidas).

Based on this record, no reasonable investigator would have concluded that

Suluki was not responsible for the account.

              In short, even with the benefit of discovery, Suluki did not present

evidence to show that there were reasonable steps that Credit One could and

should have taken or that there was additional evidence that it could or would

have found that would have shown that Khadijah opened the account without

Suluki's permission. Because no reasonable investigation would have led to a

different result, summary judgment in favor of Credit One was appropriate.




                                          30
      B.     Damages

             Suluki also challenges the district court's determination that she is

not entitled to damages because no reasonable jury could find that Credit One

willfully or negligently violated the FCRA. On appeal, Suluki argues that Credit

One willfully violated the FCRA because it followed a rigid "blueprint" for its

investigations and did not sufficiently change its investigative procedures after a

federal judge found its processes to be unreasonable. Like the district court

below, we disagree.

             Section 1681n of the FCRA provides that "[a]ny person who willfully

fails to comply with any requirement imposed under this subchapter with

respect to any consumer is liable to that consumer" for "any actual damages

sustained by the consumer as a result of the failure or damages of not less than

$100 and not more than $1,000" and punitive damages. 15 U.S.C. § 1681n(a). In

Safeco, the Supreme Court concluded that, in the context of Section 1681n,

willfulness includes "not only knowing violations of [the statute], but reckless

ones as well" 551 U.S. at 57. Conduct is "reckless" when it "violat[es] an objective

standard," id. at 68, and entails "an unjustifiably high risk of harm that is either

known or so obvious that it should be known." Farmer v. Brennan, 511 U.S. 825,




                                          31
836 (1994). The Court in Safeco reasoned that, given the FCRA's "less-than-

pellucid" text, an entity subject to the FCRA does not act willfully unless its

"reading was [] objectively unreasonable." 551 U.S. at 70.

             Here, Suluki has not presented evidence from which a reasonable

jury could find that Credit One acted in willful or reckless violation of the FCRA.

As explained in detail above, Credit One investigated Suluki's dispute pursuant

to its protocols and based on the information available to its investigators.

Though Suluki attempts to characterize Credit One's investigations as recklessly

cursory, we are convinced that no reasonable jury could find that, on this record,

Credit One's investigations posed an "unjustifiably high risk" of an erroneous

conclusion. Farmer, 511 U.S. at 836; accord Safeco Ins. Co. of Am., 551 U.S. at 68.

Credit One responded to each of Suluki's allegations of fraud by reviewing

information from internal and external sources before ultimately determining

that she was responsible for the account. Indeed, as outlined above, Suluki fails

to point to any information that Credit One overlooked that would have led it to

a different conclusion. On this record, we simply cannot say that Credit One

acted in willful or reckless violation of the FCRA. See Safeco Ins. Co. of Am., 551

U.S. at 69; see also Grayson v. Equifax Credit Info. Servs., No. 18-CV-6977 (MKB),




                                          32
2021 WL 2010398, at *6 (E.D.N.Y. Jan. 29, 2021) (rejecting plaintiff's claim that a

CRA willfully violated its duties under the FCRA when it "request[ed] additional

information and documentation for the purpose of verifying an alleged identity

theft" where consumer's original documentation "lack[ed] sufficient detail").

             We also reject Suluki's argument that Wood v. Credit One Bank, 277 F.

Supp. 3d 821, 849 (E.D. Va. 2017), compels a finding that Credit One willfully

violated the FCRA. While it is true that the district court in Wood concluded that

"[i]t was unreasonable for Credit One to simply match [the plaintiff's] personal

identifiers with those associated with the [a]ccount," id. at 853, especially when

"the alleged identity thief is a family member who could have knowledge of or

access to an individual's personal information . . . and who might use that

information to fraudulently open a credit account," id. at 853 n.53, we disagree

with Suluki's argument that Wood constitutes “authoritative guidance” under

Safeco. The Supreme Court in Safeco made explicitly clear that a finding of

willfulness may be supported by "guidance from the courts of appeals or the

Federal Trade Commission." 551 U.S. at 70. But the Wood decision relied on by

Suluki comes from neither a court of appeals nor the Federal Trade Commission,

and as far as we can tell, no agency or court of appeals has adopted or endorsed




                                         33
the district court's conclusions. Thus, "[g]iven this dearth of guidance and the

less-than-pellucid statutory text," id., we reject Suluki's claim that Credit One

willfully violated the FCRA.

             The FCRA also allows a consumer to recover "any actual damages

sustained" for "[a]ny person who is negligent in failing to comply" with the

FCRA. 15 U.S.C. § 1681o(a). The consumer must show causation between the

harm alleged by the plaintiff and the furnisher's violation.

             The CFPB and FTC join Suluki in arguing that she could have

established actual damages, pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681o, by Credit One's

continued inclusion of unverified information on her consumer report. They

contend that the actual damages inquiry relies on a "key principle . . . [that]

'[w]hen a furnisher . . . reports that the disputed information has been verified as

accurate, the question of whether the furnisher behaved reasonably will turn on

whether the furnisher acquired sufficient evidence to support the conclusion that

the information was true.'" Br. of Amici Curiae at 28-29 (alterations accepted)

(quoting Felts, 893 F.3d at 1312). We have concluded, however, that Credit One

acquired sufficient evidence to support its conclusion that the account

information was verified, and additional investigation would not have altered




                                         34
that conclusion. See Johnson, 357 F.3d at 433 ("[T]he extensive instructions by the

district court made clear that [the consumer's] claim was based on [the creditor's]

duty to investigate consumer disputes, not its duty to provide accurate

information[,] . . . [and the court correctly] instructed the jury that the damages

recoverable . . . may not include any damages that were caused by the inaccuracy

of the information itself." (internal quotations omitted)).

             Suluki has not produced evidence from which a reasonable jury

could find that Credit One willfully or negligently violated the FCRA by

verifying the account. Suluki therefore cannot demonstrate that Credit One is

liable for damages.

                                  CONCLUSION

             For the reasons set forth above, we AFFIRM the district court's

judgment.




                                         35