United States Court of Appeals
                     For the First Circuit


No. 24-1101

                      IN RE: ANDY LUU TRAN,

                             Debtor.


                         ANDY LUU TRAN,

                           Appellant,

                               v.

 CITIZENS BANK, N.A., f/k/a RBS Citizens, N.A.; HERBERT JACOBS,

                           Appellees.


          APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
               FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS

          [Hon. William G. Young, U.S. District Judge]


                             Before

                      Barron, Chief Judge,
                   Breyer,* Associate Justice,
                   and Kayatta, Circuit Judge.


     David G. Baker, for appellant.
     John F. Willis, with whom Fidelity National Law Group was on
brief, for appellee Herbert Jacobs.**

    *   Hon. Stephen G. Breyer, Associate Justice (Ret.) of the
Supreme Court of the United States, sitting by designation.
    **  Appellee Citizens Bank, N.A. did not file a brief and was
not heard at oral argument. See Fed. R. App. P. 31(c).
July 1, 2025
            KAYATTA, Circuit Judge.                This appeal arises out of an

adversary action filed in a Chapter 13 proceeding in the U.S.

Bankruptcy Court for the District of Massachusetts.                         Under the

"strong    arm"       provision    of    the      Bankruptcy      Code,    11   U.S.C.

§ 544(a)(3), the debtor, Andy Luu Tran, seeks to avoid the transfer

of his interest in his Massachusetts home (the "Property") because

the   foreclosure        deed     was   recorded        without    an     accompanying

certificate      of    acknowledgment.            The   bankruptcy      court   granted

summary judgment against Tran; the district court affirmed.                        Tran

timely appealed. For the following reasons, we affirm the judgment

of the bankruptcy court.

                                             I.

            The facts are undisputed. In 2008, Tran granted Citizens

Bank, N.A. (the "Bank") a mortgage on the Property.                       In 2022, the

Bank foreclosed on the Property at an auction sale in which Herbert

Jacobs was the high bidder.                  Jacobs and the Bank executed a

memorandum of sale at the close of the auction.                   Subsequently, the

Bank recorded an affidavit of sale stating the purchase price and

Jacobs's identity and confirming that the sale complied with notice

requirements under Massachusetts law. See Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 244,

§ 15(b)    (2024)      (requiring       an    affidavit      of   sale    "fully   and

particularly stating the person's acts" to be recorded in the

registry    of    deeds);       id.     § 14      (2024)    (stating      the   notice

requirements for a foreclosure sale).                      A foreclosure deed was


                                         - 3 -
recorded along with the affidavit of sale; however, the deed did

not include the signature page required under Massachusetts law.

See Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 183, § 29 (2024) ("No deed shall be

recorded unless a certificate of its acknowledgment or of the proof

of   its    due     execution . . .        is   endorsed   upon   or   annexed   to

it . . . .").

             Jacobs subsequently served on Tran a notice to vacate

premises.         The next day, Tran filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy

petition,     and,     a    day   later,    an   adversary   complaint     in    the

bankruptcy court seeking to avoid what he termed the "transfer of

title" that occurred at foreclosure due to the improperly recorded

deed.      Tran then filed motions for judgment on the pleadings on

the adversary complaint, which the bankruptcy court converted to

motions for summary judgment.               The Bank and Jacobs filed cross-

motions for summary judgment on Tran's adversary complaint.

             Ruling in the adversary proceeding, the bankruptcy court

first held that, under § 544's "strong arm" provision, the only

"transfer" that occurred at foreclosure was of Tran's equity of

redemption, because legal title at that point was with the Bank.

And Tran's equity of redemption, the court held, was extinguished

at the conclusion of the foreclosure auction by the execution of

the memorandum of sale between the Bank and Jacobs.                    Delivery of

the deed thereafter only "implicate[d] certain limited rights"

which      "d[id]     not    revive    [Tran's]      extinguished      equity    of


                                       - 4 -
redemption."       Although the bankruptcy court assumed Tran had

standing under 11 U.S.C. § 522(h) to proceed in the trustee's shoes

for the purposes of an avoidance action under § 544, it held that,

under Massachusetts law, the properly recorded affidavit of sale

"provide[d]     constructive   notice       to   a   hypothetical   good   faith

purchaser . . . and,        as such,    a trustee could not avoid the

transfer (extinguishment) of the Debtor's equity of redemption on

the Property."      Given that holding, the court did not reach the

issue    of   whether   a   deed   without       a   signature   page   provided

constructive notice.        The bankruptcy court also rejected Tran's

motion for relief from the judgment on the same grounds.                See Fed.

R. Civ. P. 59(e); Fed. R. Bankr. P. 9023.

              Tran appealed to the U.S. District Court for the District

of Massachusetts, which affirmed the decision of the bankruptcy

court.    Tran now appeals to us.

                                     II.

              This court "review[s] the bankruptcy court's decision

directly, despite the intermediate district-court decision."               U.S.

Bank, N.A. v. Desmond (In re Mbazira), 15 F.4th 106, 111 (1st Cir.

2021).    "We assess the bankruptcy court's factual findings for

clear error and its legal conclusions de novo."              Id.

                                       A.

              "Chapter 5 of the Bankruptcy Code affords bankruptcy

trustees the authority to 'set aside certain types of transfers


                                    - 5 -
and recapture the value of those avoided transfers for the benefit

of the estate.'"     Merit Mgmt. Grp., LP v. FTI Consulting, Inc.,

583 U.S. 366, 370 (2018) (cleaned up) (quoting Charles J. Tabb,

Law of Bankruptcy § 6.2, at 474 (4th ed. 2016)).       The "strong arm"

provision grants such authority, stating that a trustee

          may avoid any transfer of property of the
          debtor . . . that is voidable by . . . a bona
          fide purchaser of real property . . . from the
          debtor, against whom applicable law permits
          such transfer to be perfected, that obtains
          the status of a bona fide purchaser and has
          perfected such transfer at the time of the
          commencement of the case, whether or not such
          a purchaser exists.

11 U.S.C. § 544(a), (a)(3).       In other words, § 554(a) and (a)(3)

"give[] the trustee the rights of a bona fide purchaser" such that

"the trustee can avoid most unperfected and incomplete transfers

of the debtor's . . . property."       1 Robert E. Ginsberg & Robert D.

Martin,   Ginsberg   &   Martin   on   Bankruptcy   § 9.01[A],   at   9-5

(Catherine J. Furay ed., 6th ed. 2022).

          Moreover, "[a]lthough the statute . . . refer[s] to the

trustee's right to avoid transfers under § 544, a debtor in

possession . . . may also benefit from these avoiding powers" in

some instances.    Id. § 9.01[A][1], at 9-6; see 11 U.S.C. § 522(h)

("The debtor may avoid a transfer of property . . . to the extent

that the debtor could have exempted such property . . . if . . .

such transfer is avoidable by the trustee under [§] 544 . . . .").




                                  - 6 -
                As a debtor in possession, Tran seeks to avoid the

"transfer" of his interest in the Property under the "strong arm"

provision.1        In order to assess his claim, we first decide what

property interest is at stake and when any "transfer" occurred.

See González v. Banco Popular De Puerto Rico (In re Cancel), 7

F.4th 23, 29 (1st Cir. 2021) ("The core question under 11 U.S.C.

[§ 544(a)(3)] is whether under state law the debtor conveyed a

property interest in the real property at issue . . . .").                    We

then consider whether a hypothetical bona-fide purchaser would

have been able to avoid that "transfer."               See Stern v. Cont'l

Assurance Co. (In re Ryan), 851 F.2d 502, 505–06 (1st Cir. 1988).

                                         B.

                On appeal, Tran claims two interests in the Property

that       he   says   support   an   avoidance   action:   first,    his   pre-

foreclosure right (known as the equity of redemption) to redeem

legal title to the Property by paying off the mortgage, and second,

his post-foreclosure right to surplus proceeds after the sale,

together with his possessory interest in the Property.               We address

each in turn.




       1Following the parties' lead, we, like the bankruptcy court,
assume that Tran has standing to bring this avoidance action as a
debtor in possession under 11 U.S.C.§ 522(h).


                                       - 7 -
                                    1.

           Under Massachusetts law, a grant of a mortgage splits

title into two parts: legal title to the mortgagee and equitable

title to the mortgagor.     Bevilacqua v. Rodriguez, 955 N.E. 2d 884,

894 (Mass. 2011).     Upon default, the mortgagor's property interest

is known as the equity of redemption, which consists of "the basic

and historic right of a debtor to redeem the mortgage obligation

after its due date" and regain legal title to the property.               Id.

(quoting Restatement (Third) of Prop.: Mortgs. ch. 3, intro. note

(Am. L. Inst. 1997)).

           Massachusetts law provides, however, that a mortgagor's

equity of redemption persists only until the property has been

sold via foreclosure.      See Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 244, § 18 (2024)

("The mortgagor . . . may . . . redeem the land mortgaged . . .

unless the land has been sold pursuant to a power of sale contained

in the mortgage deed.").     And Massachusetts courts have uniformly

held that the foreclosure sale is complete at the close of the

auction,   when   a   memorandum   of    sale   is   executed   between   the

mortgagee and the highest bidder.         Williams v. Resol. GGF OY, 630

N.E.2d 581, 585 (Mass. 1994) ("The execution of the memorandum of

sale terminated the plaintiffs' equity of redemption."); Outpost

Cafe, Inc. v. Fairhaven Sav. Bank, 322 N.E.2d 183, 187 (Mass. App.




                                   - 8 -
Ct. 1975) (interpreting Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 244, § 182 to mean that

a mortgagor's right to redeem is extinguished at least as early as

the time of execution of the memorandum of sale at the foreclosure

sale); White v. Marcarelli, 166 N.E. 734, 736 (Mass. 1929) ("If a

foreclosure sale is fairly conducted and there is no defect in the

proceedings, the right of the intervenor to redeem is gone when

the contract of sale was made with the purchaser at the auction.").

               In sum, Tran did indeed have a property interest in the

form of an equity of redemption, and that interest was extinguished

at the foreclosure sale when the Bank and Jacobs executed a

memorandum of sale.            Further, the Bankruptcy Code is clear that

"the       foreclosure   of    a    debtor's       equity   of    redemption"    is   a

"transfer"       under   the       meaning    of    the   Code.      See   11   U.S.C.

§ 101(54)(C).        Thus,      as    the    bankruptcy     court    found,     Tran's

avoidance action gets to first base to the extent it is based on

an attempt to recover his equitable interest in the Property,

rather than legal title.

                                             2.

               Tran's effort to rely on his asserted post-foreclosure

equity in the property as a basis for an avoidance action fares

less well.       Because this argument is floated for the first time



       2The language of the provision interpreted by the Outpost
Cafe court is substantively identical to that of the provision in
force today. See Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 244, § 18 (2024).


                                         - 9 -
before us, it receives, at best, plain-error review.              See Nat'l

Fed'n of the Blind v. The Container Store, Inc., 904 F.3d 70, 85–

86 (1st Cir. 2018).    And Tran makes no showing of plain error.           It

is   true   that,   after   a   memorandum    of   sale   is   executed    at

foreclosure, a mortgagor retains an entitlement to any surplus

proceeds left over after the mortgage is paid.             See Mass. Gen.

Laws ch. 183, § 27 (2024) ("The holder of a mortgage of real

estate . . . out of the money arising from a sale under the power

of sale shall be entitled to retain all sums then secured by the

mortgage . . .      rendering    the   surplus,      if    any,    to     the

mortgagor . . . ."); Duclersaint v. Fed. Nat'l Mortg. Ass'n, 696

N.E.2d 536, 538–39 (Mass. 1998) ("Generally, a mortgagee must give

a mortgagor any surplus generated at a foreclosure sale[, which

is] . . . any amount recovered at a foreclosure sale above the

amount owed to the mortgagee, including fees and costs." (citation

omitted)).   In addition, Tran retains a possessory interest in the

property, since he still resides there.

            But Tran identifies no "transfer" of these interests,

meaning there is nothing to "avoid."         See 11 U.S.C. § 544(a).      Nor

can he revive his lost equity of redemption through these more

limited interests.     See In re Crichlow, 322 B.R. 229, 237 (Bankr.

D. Mass. 2004) (holding that a mortgagor's "limited rights . . .

to receive any residual amounts it is due after the mortgagee's

debt has been satisfied . . . do not revive the lost equity of


                                  - 10 -
redemption"); Ray v. JP Morgan Chase & Co., No. 15 MISC 00507,

2016 WL 2854323, at *6 (Mass. Land Ct. May 16, 2016) (same).                Tran

also emphasizes that creditors are required to seek relief from

the Bankruptcy Code's automatic stay before interfering with a

debtor's post-foreclosure interests.            See, e.g., In re Sullivan,

551 B.R. 868, 868–89 (Bankr. D. Mass. 2016) (reasoning that "a

debtor's bare possessory interest" is "property of the estate"

even   if   the   debtor's     other     interests    were   extinguished    at

foreclosure (quoting Fed. Nat'l Mortg. Ass'n v. Fitzgerald (In re

Fitzgerald), 237 B.R. 252, 258 (Bankr. D. Conn. 1999)).                But he

fails to explain how the fact that creditors would need to seek

relief from the automatic stay to interfere with his remaining

interests in the Property supports his ability to avoid the loss

of his previous interests in the Property.              In sum, there is no

plain error here.

            Thus, Tran's only route to regaining equitable title to

the Property is by avoiding the foreclosure of his equity of

redemption.       We   now   turn   to   the   key   question:   whether    that

"transfer" was "so far perfected as to be effective against a bona

fide purchaser of that [property interest] from [Tran] under

nonbankruptcy law."      Ginsberg & Martin, supra, § 9.01[B], at 9-7.

                                         C.

            In Massachusetts, a proper recording in the registry of

deeds provides constructive notice, "a positive rule of state law


                                     - 11 -
that permits the prior purchaser to gain priority over a latter

purchaser, regardless of whether the latter purchaser really knows

of the prior purchase."          In re Ryan, 851 F.2d at 506.              This form

of notice "aris[es] by presumption of law from the existence of

facts and circumstances that a party had a duty to take notice

of."   Bank of Am., N.A. v. Casey, 52 N.E.3d 1030, 1040 n.21 (Mass.

2016) (quoting Notice, Black's Law Dictionary (10th ed. 2014)).

Thus, a purchaser "has constructive notice (whether or not he has

actual   knowledge)    of    a     prior   deed   if   that    deed   is    properly

recorded."   In re Ryan, 851 F.2d at 506.

           Here, the same principles apply to the extinguishment of

Tran's equity of redemption upon foreclosure.                   Tran argues that

neither the improperly recorded foreclosure deed nor the properly

recorded affidavit of sale was sufficient to provide constructive

notice of that event.            As support, he highlights this court's

decision in In re Mbazira, 15 F.4th at 112.               There, we considered

whether a mortgage deed provided constructive notice of a mortgage

encumbering registered land where, as here, the relevant deed

lacked the required certificate of acknowledgment.                Id.      Reasoning

that "the weight of precedent leans decidedly in favor of strictly

construing   the      statutory       requirement       for     certificates       of

acknowledgment,"      we    held    that,   under      Massachusetts       law,   the

recording of the unacknowledged mortgage was "not effective to

give constructive notice to third parties."                   Id. at 112–13; see


                                      - 12 -
also In re Ryan, 851 F.2d at 507 (holding that a mortgage which

lacked the signature of one witness per the requirements of Vermont

law "could not serve as constructive notice of [the existence of

that mortgage] to a future purchaser").

          But   here,   our   inquiry     focuses   on   notice   of   the

"foreclosure of [Tran's] equity of redemption," since that is the

"transfer" with which the Bankruptcy Code is concerned, 11 U.S.C.

§ 101(54)(C), and not on notice of a mortgage, as in In re Mbazira,

which must be evidenced by the recording of a deed, see 15 F.4th

at 111. Thus, even though, in other contexts, a recorded affidavit

of sale cannot give constructive notice of the conveyance of a

real property interest, here we are not dealing with such a

conveyance, but with the extinguishment of a mortgagor's equity of

redemption through the sale itself.       And although we have no prior

case on this precise issue, we see no reason why a properly

recorded affidavit of sale would not provide the requisite notice

of the very sale it memorializes.         As such, we are persuaded by

the   Bankruptcy   Court   for   the    District    of   Massachusetts's

suggestion in another case that a properly recorded affidavit of

sale would "put the world on notice that the foreclosure sale had

been consummated, so that the failure to record the foreclosure

deed itself might not present difficulties."        Weiss v. U.S. Bank,

N.A. (In re Mularski), 565 B.R. 203, 208 n.2 (Bankr. D. Mass.

2017); cf. Cerrato v. BAC Home Loans Servicing (In re Cerrato),


                                 - 13 -
504 B.R. 23, 33 (Bankr. E.D.N.Y. 2014) (holding that a "Report of

Sale"      provided     "express    notice"      under    New    York   law    that   a

foreclosure sale had been conducted).

              Indeed, the presence of the properly recorded affidavit

of sale here distinguishes cases where the Bankruptcy Court for

the District of Massachusetts declined to find constructive notice

of a "transfer" of a debtor's equity of redemption at a foreclosure

sale. See In re Mularski, 565 B.R. at 208 & n.2; Neiva v. Loancare,

LLC (In re Neiva), No. 23-40098, 2024 WL 544049, at *6–7 (Bankr.

D. Mass. Feb. 9, 2024).            In each of those decisions, no documents

had been recorded prior to the debtor's bankruptcy petition.3

              To   be   sure,    Tran    correctly       notes   that   a     recorded

affidavit of sale does not provide "conclusive proof of compliance"

with recording requirements under Massachusetts law, such that the

transfer of the property to Jacobs could not have been perfected

by   the    affidavit     of    sale.    See     Fed.    Nat'l    Mortg.      Ass'n   v.

Hendricks, 977 N.E.2d 552, 558 (Mass. 2012); Mass. Gen. Laws

ch. 244, § 15(b) (2024) (providing that an affidavit of sale may


      3 In In re Giacchetti, the bankruptcy court noted, while
deciding a different issue, that "a bankruptcy trustee cloaked
with the status of a bona fide purchaser . . . may avoid the
transfer of a debtor's interest in property at a foreclosure sale
if the deed was not recorded prior to the bankruptcy filing."
Giacchetti v. Everhome Mortg. (In re Giacchetti), 584 B.R. 441,
448 (Bankr. D. Mass. 2018). But a review of the docket in that
case suggests that no documents relating to the foreclosure sale
were recorded prior to the debtor's bankruptcy petition.     As a
result, this case is also distinguishable.


                                        - 14 -
"be   admitted    as   evidence      that   the   power   of   sale    was   duly

executed").   But the question is not whether the affidavit of sale

perfects the conveyance of the Property from the Bank to Jacobs.

Rather, the relevant question is whether the affidavit of sale

provides   notice      of   the    extinguishment    of   Tran's      equity   of

redemption.      And, as we have explained, it does.

           Finally, Tran contends that the affidavit of sale "lives

or dies" with the deed; "that is, if the deed is void, so is the

memorandum or affidavit."            But he cites no authority for this

proposition and does not elaborate on it, so we need not address

it.   See United States v. Zannino, 895 F.2d 1, 17 (1st Cir. 1990).

           As a result, we agree with the bankruptcy court that the

affidavit of sale provided constructive notice of the foreclosure

under Massachusetts law.           For that reason, we need not reach the

question of whether the improperly recorded foreclosure deed would

independently suffice.            We therefore conclude that Tran cannot

avoid the "transfer" of his equity of redemption in the Property.

                                       III.

           For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the judgment of the

bankruptcy court.




                                      - 15 -