United States Court of Appeals
                       For the First Circuit


No. 24-1594

                           BRANDON VELEZ,

                        Plaintiff, Appellant,

                                 v.

              RACHAEL EUTZY; ERIK SLOCUM; CASEY SEIGLE;
                 CITY OF MANCHESTER, NEW HAMPSHIRE,

                       Defendants, Appellees.


          APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
               FOR THE DISTRICT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE

        [Hon. Steven J. McAuliffe, U.S. District Judge]


                               Before

                        Barron, Chief Judge,
                     Breyer,* Associate Justice,
                     and Kayatta, Circuit Judge.


     Madeline Meth, Boston University Appellate Clinic, with whom
Stephen T. Martin, Seth J. Hipple, and The Law Offices of Martin
& Hipple, PLLC were on brief, for appellant.

     Keelan B. Forey, with whom Matthew V. Burrows and Gallagher,
Callahan & Gartrell, P.C. were on brief, for appellees.




    *   Hon. Stephen Breyer, Associate Justice (Ret.) of      the
Supreme Court of the United States, sitting by designation.
September 16, 2025
            KAYATTA, Circuit Judge.         This case arises out of a

traffic stop in Manchester, New Hampshire, which escalated into a

physical struggle between several police officers and Brandon

Velez.    After Velez did not immediately comply with orders to step

out of his vehicle, two officers physically attempted to remove

him and overcome his firm resistance.        In the process, one officer

struck Velez four times and tased him twice.              Velez later sued

several of the officers and the City of Manchester (the "City")

under federal and state common law for injuries he sustained during

the incident.      In response, they filed a motion for summary

judgment, which the district court granted.               Velez v. Eutzy,

No. 23-cv-44-SM-TSM,    2024   WL    2959656,   at   *1   (D.N.H.   June 12,

2024).    Velez now appeals.        While we conclude that one of the

officers used excessive force, we affirm the district court on all

counts.

                                     I.

            As captured in full by the officers' body cameras, the

traffic stop and ensuing altercation unfolded as follows.                On

February 22, 2021, shortly after 1:00 a.m., Velez was driving from

a local convenience store back to his apartment in Manchester.           On

patrol in a marked police cruiser, Manchester police officers

Rachael Eutzy and Erik Slocum noticed that Velez's vehicle had a

broken headlight.    They made a U-turn and began to follow Velez,

during which time they noticed that Velez's vehicle also had a


                                    - 3 -
broken taillight.     As they followed Velez, he accelerated, turned

left, and then made another left, which the officers viewed as an

attempt to elude them.       Shortly thereafter, Velez pulled into his

parking spot, located near where the officers first saw him, and

turned off the car's engine.       Velez denies that he was attempting

to avoid the officers and argues that he did not see the police

car's blue lights, which the officers activated while he was

turning off the main road, until he was already parked.

            Slocum later declared by affidavit that the address

where     Velez   parked   had   prior   associations   with   drugs    and

prostitution.      The officers exited the police car and approached

Velez's vehicle.     Velez was sitting in his car and had both of his

hands up.     According to Velez, he had not rolled down his car

window because the window was not working.

            Eutzy wore a full department uniform with badge and

insignia.    She approached the driver's side and said, "Hey, how we

doing?"     She then opened the driver's side car door.                Velez

responded, "Why [are] you opening my door?       First off, I live here.

That's so disrespectful."        Eutzy replied, "Okay, okay.      How is

that disrespectful?"       Velez said:   "You're not supposed to open my

door just like that."         Eutzy's tone then became stern, as she

instructed Velez to "[s]top talking."          Velez then said, "Okay,

hold up," and reached into his left pocket to retrieve what turned

out to be a cell phone.          Immediately, Eutzy instructed him to


                                   - 4 -
"[g]et your hands out of your pockets."       She told him to "[g]o

ahead and hop out."   Rather than complying, Velez responded, "No.

No.   You can't, you can't do that."     Eutzy then grabbed Velez's

arm and began to pull him out of the car.   Velez resisted and began

shouting, "Why are you doing this?      Why are you doing this?   You

haven't even told me why you pulled me over."

           Slocum, who had by this point come around to the driver's

side, yanked on Velez's neck area and told him to "get out of the

fucking car."   Velez still resisted.    A physical struggle between

the officers and Velez ensued, during which Slocum again instructed

Velez to "[g]et out of the car" and told him that he was "under

arrest."   Velez continued to resist getting out of his car, began

shouting for help, and appeared to brace himself against the car

frame as the officers continued to pull on him.      Slocum then hit

Velez twice in the abdomen and twice in the head, and tased him

twice.   After the second tasing, the officers pulled Velez out of

the car and onto the ground, where they attempted to handcuff him.

           By this point, a third officer had arrived at the scene.

Eutzy instructed Velez to "[s]top fighting," and the third officer

told him to "get on your stomach, idiot."      Velez responded, "I'm

not fighting" and repeatedly shouted that he "c[ould]n't breathe."

The officers handcuffed Velez behind his back and maneuvered him

to a standing position.   By this point, seven police officers were

on the scene.    Slocum asked for Velez's name, and the cadre of


                               - 5 -
officers led Velez to a police car.            At the police station, Velez

was charged with two misdemeanors and a traffic violation.                    He

pled guilty to the traffic violation, and the misdemeanor charges

were dropped.

            On December 9, 2022, Velez sued the City and several of

its police officers in state court, alleging a suite of federal

and state-common-law claims.         The City, Eutzy, Slocum, and another

officer who was on the scene named Casey Seigle (collectively,

"defendants") removed the case to federal court in January 2023

and moved for summary judgment in March 2024, which the district

court granted.        Velez now appeals.

                                       II.

            We review an order granting summary judgment de novo,

"drawing all reasonable inferences in favor of the non-moving

party."    Pac. Indem. Co. v. Deming, 828 F.3d 19, 23 (1st Cir. 2016)

(quoting    Roman      Catholic    Bishop     of   Springfield   v.    City   of

Springfield, 724 F.3d 78, 89 (1st Cir. 2013)).                   Against this

backdrop, we proceed to Velez's claims.

                                       A.

            We begin with Velez's wrongful-arrest claim (brought

pursuant    to   42    U.S.C.     § 1983)    and   false-imprisonment     claim

(brought pursuant to state law).              The parties agree that both

claims fail if probable cause existed for his arrest.                 See Holder

v. Town of Sandown, 585 F.3d 500, 504 (1st Cir. 2009) ("An arrest


                                      - 6 -
is lawful if the officer has probable cause." (cleaned up)); Ojo

v. Lorenzo, 64 A.3d 974, 983 (N.H. 2013) ("[P]robable cause is a

defense   to   a    claim   for   false   imprisonment     resulting   from   a

warrantless detention.").

           The requisites of probable cause are well established.

An officer has probable cause to arrest when the "facts and

circumstances within the officer's knowledge . . . are sufficient

to warrant a prudent person, or one of reasonable caution, in

believing,     in   the   circumstances    shown,   that    the   suspect   has

committed, is committing, or is about to commit an offense."

Michigan v. DeFillippo, 443 U.S. 31, 37 (1979).                   This is an

objective inquiry, Town of Sandown, 585 F.3d at 504, and is

"determined in light of the information known to the police at the

time of the arrest," United States v. Diallo, 29 F.3d 23, 25 (1st

Cir. 1994).     At the summary judgment stage, "when the underlying

facts claimed to support probable cause are not in dispute, whether

those 'raw facts' constitute probable cause is an issue of law

that we must determine de novo."             Town of Sandown, 585 F.3d at

504.

           Eutzy and Slocum claim that they arrested Velez for two

reasons: (1) resisting orders to exit the vehicle in violation of

N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. (RSA) 642:2 (2021) and (2) disobeying a police

officer by failing to stop when signaled and refusing to provide

his name to officers when asked in violation of RSA 265:4. Because


                                     - 7 -
we conclude that the first rationale supplied probable cause for

Velez's arrest, we decline to address the second.

              As    a    threshold           matter,    the    officers    were       clearly

entitled to insist that Velez exit his car.                       See United States v.

Coplin, 463 F.3d 96, 102 (1st Cir. 2006) ("[A] police officer may,

as a matter of course, require the driver of a car lawfully stopped

for a suspected traffic violation to step out of his vehicle.").

This   rule    is       rooted    in     a    concern    for   officer     safety.        See

Pennsylvania v. Mimms, 434 U.S. 106, 111 & n.6 (1977).                                And the

law clearly allows officers to use reasonable force to effect a

lawful detention, including force to overbear resistance.                                 See

Graham v. M.S. Connor, 490 U.S. 386, 396 (1989).

              RSA 642:2          makes       it   a    misdemeanor    for        anyone    to

"knowingly     or       purposely      physically       interfere[]       with    a    person

recognized to be a law enforcement official . . . seeking to effect

an arrest or detention of the person . . . regardless of whether

there is a legal basis for the arrest."                       The officers argue that,

because "Velez's refusal to exit the vehicle when ordered to by

Officer Eutzy was illegal" under RSA 642:2, that refusal supplied

probable cause for Velez's subsequent arrest.                             Insofar as the

officers are contending that Velez's verbal refusal to exit the

car violated RSA 642:2, they may well be mistaken.                                RSA 642:2

explicitly states that "[v]erbal protestations alone shall not

constitute resisting arrest or detention."                      But once Eutzy grabbed


                                               - 8 -
Velez's arm to remove him from the car, Velez's physical resistance

provided an indisputably sufficient basis for the officers to

conclude     that   Velez   was     resisting    detention   and    therefore

committing a misdemeanor in violation of RSA 642:2.

             While New Hampshire's criminal code does not define

"detention," its Supreme Court has explained that to "detain" means

"to hold or keep in or as if in custody, to keep back, and to stop

or delay."     State v. Kelley, 899 A.2d 236, 238 (N.H. 2006) (cleaned

up).    The New Hampshire Supreme Court has also held, in a slightly

different context, that a person's physical resistance to an

officer's attempt to remove him from a space can qualify as

resisting detention under RSA 642:2.         See State v. Clay, No. 2018-

0184,   2019   WL   1970210,   at   *3   (N.H.   May 2,   2019)    (finding   a

violation of RSA 642:2 where the defendant physically resisted an

officer pulling on his arm in order to remove him from a local

board meeting).       Moreover, New Hampshire courts have described

traffic stops, which can include protective frisks, as a form of

detention.     See State v. McKinnon-Andrews, 846 A.2d 1198, 1201–02

(N.H. 2004); State v. Roach, 677 A.2d 157, 160 (N.H. 1996).

             Given this case law, the officers had ample basis to

conclude that requiring Velez to exit his car during the traffic

stop constituted a form of "detention."           Cf. State v. Fleury, 364

A.2d 625, 626 (N.H. 1976) (per curiam) (noting that RSA 642:2's

inclusion of the word "detention" was meant "to avoid defenses


                                     - 9 -
based on technical distinction between arrest and other forms of

seizures of the person falling short of a full-blown arrest").

They were therefore justified in thinking that Velez's physical

resistance to their subsequent attempts to remove him from the car

violated RSA 642:2.

           Velez argues that an arrest occurred the moment Eutzy

grabbed Velez's arm and was therefore unlawful because it was

preceded by no physical resistance.     But calling the use of force

employed to effect a detention per se an arrest would run opposite

to the law's recognition that reasonable force can be used merely

to detain.   See Coplin, 463 F.3d at 102.    And it would ignore New

Hampshire's statutory distinction between arrest and detention.

           Velez finally contends that no reasonable officer could

have concluded that Velez was resisting arrest or detention because

he was not given an opportunity to submit before force was used on

him.   But the cases Velez cites for this proposition analyzed this

factor in the context of Fourth Amendment excessive-force claims.

See Ciolino v. Gikas, 861 F.3d 296, 303–04 (1st Cir. 2017); Gray

v. Cummings, 917 F.3d 1, 12–13 (1st Cir. 2019).        We therefore

address this argument in our excessive-force analysis.     Nor do we

see how this argument would alter our thinking here, where the

video evidence clearly depicts Velez first verbally refusing to

get out and then physically resisting the officers' attempts to

achieve compliance. We thus affirm the district court's conclusion


                               - 10 -
that, as a matter of law, the officers had probable cause to arrest

Velez, and that Velez's wrongful-arrest and false-imprisonment

claims fail as a result.

                                       B.

           Our conclusion that the officers had probable cause to

arrest Velez also disposes of Velez's claim that he was arrested

in retaliation for protesting Eutzy's conduct and trying to record

their encounter.    See Nieves v. Bartlett, 587 U.S. 391, 402 (2019)

("[A] plaintiff pressing a retaliatory arrest claim must [also]

plead and prove the absence of probable cause for the arrest.").

In any event, the undisputed facts do not support the contention

that the arrest was retaliatory.        The video clearly shows that the

arrest followed Velez's physical resistance to Eutzy's lawful

command, rather than simply his protestations. Nor does the record

support Velez's assertion that he was arrested for allegedly

attempting to record the officers.          The body camera footage shows

Velez retrieving his phone from his pocket during his colloquy

with Eutzy.     But he did not turn it on, activate the camera, or

otherwise tell the officers that he was planning to record them.

And   neither   Eutzy   nor   Slocum    made   any   comments   about   Velez

potentially recording the encounter.            Cf. Scott v. Harris, 550

U.S. 372, 381 (2007) ("When opposing parties tell two different

stories, one of which is blatantly contradicted by the record, so

that no reasonable jury could believe it, a court should not adopt


                                  - 11 -
that version of the facts for purposes of ruling on a motion for

summary judgment.").

          For the foregoing reasons, the district court did not

err in concluding that, as a matter of law, Velez was not subject

to a retaliatory arrest.     We move on.

                                  C.

                                  1.

          Velez also brings Fourth Amendment excessive-force and

common-law assault-and-battery claims against Eutzy and Slocum.

Because "our determination of the reasonableness of the force used

under § 1983 controls our determination of the reasonableness of

the force used under the common law assault and battery claim[],"

Raiche v. Pietroski, 623 F.3d 30, 40 (1st Cir. 2010), we focus our

analysis on the Fourth Amendment excessive-force claim brought

under § 1983.

          To determine whether force used in an arrest exceeds

what the Constitution allows, we proceed in two steps.      First, we

must ascertain the relevant facts and circumstances.      Scott, 550

U.S. at 378.     Here, there is no need to have a trial to determine

those facts. Rather, given the video evidence, the record contains

no disputed material facts.      Second, we must determine whether,

given those facts, the force used was "objectively reasonable."

Id. at 381.     This is a "question of law."   Id. at 381 n.8.




                                - 12 -
           The key question, therefore, is whether the officers

used an unreasonable amount of force to effectuate their lawful

goal of removing Velez from his car.       The border between excessive

and acceptable force is often "hazy," with the result that "a

reasonable    officer   sometimes    may    use   unreasonable   force."

Mlodzinski v. Lewis, 648 F.3d 24, 33 (1st Cir. 2011) (citation

omitted). To determine whether an officer used unreasonable force,

we consider "the totality of the circumstances."         Gray, 917 F.3d

at 8.     Relevant factors include "the severity of the crime at

issue, whether the suspect poses an immediate threat to the safety

of the officers or others, and whether he is actively resisting

arrest or attempting to evade arrest by flight."       Graham, 490 U.S.

at 396.

           In considering these factors, we distinguish between the

actions of Eutzy and Slocum.        Though Eutzy initiated the use of

force by grabbing Velez's arm after he verbally refused to exit

the car, Slocum escalated that force by yanking on Velez's neck

area and then hitting and tasing him multiple times soon after.

We cannot say that Eutzy's pulling on Velez's arm rose to the level

of excessive force. But we are persuaded that the escalating force

deployed by Slocum without pause or warning -- to the point of

body blows, head blows, and double tasing -- was not reasonable in

its entirety.




                               - 13 -
           Many of the Graham factors favor Velez.             A trivial

offense prompted the stop.       Two officers were present, and the

situation presented no out-of-the-ordinary threats to their safety

(other than the risks incident to even routine stops). See Raiche,

623 F.3d at 37 (noting that the plaintiff posed little threat to

officers because he remained in his vehicle and "never displayed

any weapons or made any verbal threats").          Nor did Velez pose an

active flight risk, since he had parked and turned off his engine.

           The district court concluded, Velez, 2024 WL 2959656, at

*8 -- and the officers now argue -- that the force deployed was

reasonable and necessary once Velez began to resist the officers'

efforts to remove him from the car, at least in part to secure

their   safety.   But   the   resistance    here   was   passive   and   its

resoluteness was untested by a conversation or the passing of even

a few moments.    And while we do not doubt that Velez's initial

resistance justified some use of force, the video discloses no

need to have immediately escalated that force to multiple blows

and tasing, all within less than a minute from Eutzy's initial

instruction that Velez "hop out."         Cf. Est. of Armstrong ex rel.

Armstrong v. Village of Pinehurst, 810 F.3d 892, 897, 901 (4th

Cir. 2016) (concluding that the officers used excessive force

where, among other things, an officer tased the plaintiff after

thirty seconds of the plaintiff resisting attempts to remove him

from a post).


                                 - 14 -
             Finally, the officers argue that several cases have

described     "hard-hand        strikes"     and     "[t]aser     deployments"    as

"legitimate law enforcement tools."                True enough.    But those cases

uniformly involved more obvious threats to law enforcement safety

than the circumstances here.            See O'Brien v. Town of Bellingham,

943   F.3d   514,     531      (1st   Cir.   2019)     (plaintiff     was   "acting

irrationally, cursing and threatening the officers, and trying to

smash a glass window"); Kenney v. Floyd, 700 F.3d 604, 610 (1st

Cir. 2012) (suspect was an "uncooperative motorist[] who posed a

continued risk of flight"); Berube v. Conley, 506 F.3d 79, 84–85

(1st Cir. 2007) (plaintiff acted erratically, wielded a hammer

against an officer, and disobeyed orders to show his hands);

Gaudreault v. Municipality of Salem, 923 F.2d 203, 206 (1st Cir.

1990)    (plaintiff      was    "visibly     intoxicated,"      "yelling    at   bar

employees," "disturbing the patrons," and "vigorously resist[ing]

arrest").     They therefore shed little light on whether hard-hand

strikes and the tasing of Velez were appropriate in view of the

circumstances.

             In   sum,      after     evaluating       the   "totality      of   the

circumstances," Gray, 917 F.3d at 8, we conclude that Slocum

violated Velez's Fourth Amendment right to be free from excessive

force.




                                       - 15 -
                                2.

          All that, though, does not mean that Slocum is liable

for damages:   The officers invoke a qualified immunity defense.

Qualified immunity "gives government officials breathing room to

make reasonable but mistaken judgments," Ashcroft v. al-Kidd, 563

U.S. 731, 743 (2011), thus shielding from liability "all but the

plainly incompetent or those who knowingly violate the law," Malley

v. Briggs, 475 U.S. 335, 341 (1986).     "An officer is entitled to

qualified immunity if an objectively reasonable officer could have

concluded (even mistakenly) that his or her conduct did not violate

the plaintiffs' rights."   Johnson v. City of Biddeford, 92 F.4th

367, 375 (1st Cir. 2024) (cleaned up).    This is a lenient test by

design.   We have cautioned against "second-guessing where the

officers, acting in the heat of events, made a defensible (albeit

imperfect) judgment."   Statchen v. Palmer, 623 F.3d 15, 18 (1st

Cir. 2010).1




     1  We recognize that "[t]he doctrinal intersection of
qualified immunity principles and summary judgment principles" can
be murky. Morelli v. Webster, 552 F.3d 12, 18 (1st Cir. 2009).
This is "because the summary judgment standard requires absolute
deference to the nonmovant's factual assertions," while qualified
immunity "demands deference to the reasonable, if mistaken,
actions of the [defendant]."    Id. at 18–19.   To reconcile this
tension on an appeal from a final judgment, we follow a two-step
approach, "first identifying the version of events that best
comports with the summary judgment standard and then asking
whether, given that set of facts, a reasonable officer should have
known that his actions were unlawful." Id. at 19.


                              - 16 -
             The district court did not reach the topic of qualified

immunity, which was raised by the officers as an alternative basis

for summary judgment, instead concluding that no reasonable jury

could find that the officers deployed excessive force.      See Velez,

2024 WL 2959656, at *8.       But both parties brief the issue on

appeal.    See Yan v. ReWalk Robotics Ltd., 973 F.3d 22, 39 (1st

Cir. 2020) (exercising our "discretion to affirm a decision of the

district court on alternative grounds," especially where "the

parties . . . extensively briefed the" alternative grounds on

appeal).     And "[t]here can be no question of our power to rely on

a different ground than the district court did in affirming its

judgment."     Sands v. Ridefilm Corp., 212 F.3d 657, 662 (1st Cir.

2000); see also Wilber v. Curtis, 872 F.3d 15, 20 (1st Cir. 2017)

(resolving a Fourth Amendment claim on qualified immunity grounds

even though the district court did not reach the issue).

             Under the doctrine of qualified immunity, Slocum can be

held liable only if, at the time of his interaction with Velez,

the law "clearly established" that the force that he employed was

excessive.     See Wilber, 872 F.3d at 21.     And whether the law is

"clearly established" is itself an issue of law subject to de novo

review.    Ciolino,861 F.3d at 302.      So, we ask, what law "clearly

established" that the amount of force used by Slocum here was

excessive?




                                - 17 -
            Certainly, case law clearly established Velez's right

"to be free from the use of excessive force by an arresting

officer."   Morelli v. Webster, 552 F.3d 12, 23–24 (1st Cir. 2009).

But that only pins down the right generally; it does not establish

that the conduct here violated that right.    See Ashcroft, 563 U.S.

at 742 ("We have repeatedly told courts . . . not to define clearly

established law at a high level of generality.").        Hence, the

pivotal inquiry is "whether in the particular factual context of

[this] case, a reasonable officer would have understood that his

conduct violated the right."   Mlodzinski, 648 F.3d at 32–33.

            In arguing that we should resolve this inquiry in his

favor, Velez first cites a pair of cases -- Raiche, 623 F.3d at

34, and Alexis v. McDonald's Restaurants of Massachusetts, Inc.,

67 F.3d 341 (1st Cir. 1995) -- that he says clearly establish that

the force used on him was excessive.    In Raiche, a police officer

tackled a man, who was sitting quietly on his stopped motorcycle,

to the ground with such force that the man sustained head injuries

and the motorcycle was irreparably damaged.    623 F.3d at 34.   And

in Alexis, the plaintiff was sitting at a restaurant booth when an

officer, "without asking or directing [the plaintiff] to get up

from the table," violently pulled her out of the booth and across

the table, forcibly handcuffed her, dragged her to the police

cruiser, and pushed her inside.   67 F.3d at 346.




                               - 18 -
            The force visited on the unwitting plaintiffs in Raiche

and Alexis differs materially and obviously from the force used on

Velez.    In those cases, neither plaintiff was given -- let alone

indicated potential noncompliance with -- a verbal order before

officers used force on them.        Neither plaintiff engaged in any

resistance to officers' attempts to detain them.      See Raiche, 623

F.3d at 37; Alexis, 67 F.3d at 346.        And both Raiche and Alexis

involved inflictions of force that were so plainly grievous against

the plaintiffs' utter lack of resistance that "the level of force

chosen by the officer[s could not] in any way, shape, or form be

justified under those facts."      Morelli, 552 F.3d at 24.   We cannot

say that Raiche and Alexis so squarely govern the facts here that

they     place   "the     unconstitutionality   of   the   officer[s']

conduct . . . beyond debate."      Johnson, 92 F.4th at 375 (citation

omitted).

            Second, Velez contends, citing Raiche, 623 F.3d at 38–

39, and Mlodzinski, 648 F.3d at 38, that even absent on-point case

law, it was "obvious" that the officers employed excessive force.

We disagree.     It is true that a qualified immunity defense cannot

succeed if "a general constitutional rule already identified in

the decisional law . . . appl[ies] with obvious clarity to the

specific conduct in question."      United States v. Lanier, 520 U.S.

259, 271 (1997).        "[B]ut if 'officers of reasonable competence

could disagree' on the lawfulness of the action, defendants are


                                  - 19 -
entitled to immunity." Mlodzinski, 638 F.3d at 33 (quoting Malley,

475 U.S. at 341).    Here, Slocum's use of force was not so obviously

out-of-bounds that it clearly established by its own terms a

constitutional violation.     Though we conclude above that excessive

force was used, we think the circumstances nonetheless present a

close case on which reasonable officers might have concluded

otherwise.

            "[U]nder the doctrine of qualified immunity, police

officers    are . . .   entitled    to   reasonable   latitude     in   making

judgments    about   how   much     force   is    necessary   to    overcome

resistance."     Statchen, 623 F.3d at 17–18.           We concluded that

Slocum's escalation of force against Velez crossed the threshold

from "reasonable" to "unreasonable," given the totality of the

circumstances.    But this does not mean that the officer's conduct

amounted to "plain[] incompeten[ce]" or a "knowing[] violat[ion

of] the law."    Malley, 475 U.S. at 341.        Unlike in Raiche, Alexis,

and Mlodzinski, the use of force at issue appears to reflect "the

type and kind of erroneous judgment that a reasonable police

officer under the same or similar circumstances might have made."

Morelli, 552 F.3d at 24. Velez cites no cases clearly establishing

otherwise.      Thus,   qualified    immunity     precludes   liability    on

Velez's excessive-force claim.




                                   - 20 -
                                  3.

            "As a general principle, the unfavorable disposition of

a plaintiff's federal claims at the early stages of a suit . . .

will trigger the dismissal without prejudice of any supplemental

state-law claims."    Rodriguez v. Doral Mortg. Corp., 57 F.3d 1168,

1177 (1st Cir. 1995).    But because this practice "is not compelled

by a lack of judicial power," we "may retain jurisdiction over

state-law    claims   notwithstanding    the   early   demise   of   all

foundational federal claims," so long as "the plaintiff's federal

claim is substantial."    Id.   Exercising this discretion, we turn

to whether state immunity resolves Velez's assault-and-battery

claim.

            Here, Velez himself concedes that "[t]he same standard

[as federal qualified immunity] governs New Hampshire immunity for

his state-law assault and battery claims."        We hold above that

federal qualified immunity shields the officers from liability for

Velez's excessive-force claim.     Assuming New Hampshire law to be

as Velez claims, we similarly dispose of his assault-and-battery

claim. We thus affirm the district court's conclusion that Velez's

common-law assault-and-battery claim fails as a matter of law.

                                  D.

            Next, Velez argues that a reasonable juror could find

under both federal and state law that the City failed to adequately

train its officers. A municipality may be held liable under § 1983


                                - 21 -
if the unconstitutional conduct at issue "implements or executes

a   policy   statement . . .       or   decision    officially     adopted   and

promulgated by that body's officers."               Monell v. Dep't of Soc.

Servs. of N.Y., 436 U.S. 658, 690 (1978).               In limited cases, a

municipality's "decision not to train certain employees about

their legal duty to avoid violating citizens' rights may rise to

the level of an official government policy for purposes of § 1983."

Connick v. Thompson, 563 U.S. 51, 61 (2011).             For this to be the

case, a municipality's failure to train "must amount to deliberate

indifference to the rights of persons with whom the untrained

employees come into contact."           Id. (cleaned up).

             To the extent that Velez's claims are predicated on the

City's failure to train officers on how to respond to First

Amendment-protected conduct, those claims necessarily fail.              As we

conclude above, Velez's retaliatory-arrest claim does not state a

First     Amendment   violation.        And    "[i]f . . .   the   officer   has

inflicted no constitutional harm, neither the municipality nor the

supervisor can be held liable."               Wilson v. Town of Mendon, 294

F.3d 1, 6–7 (1st Cir. 2002).            We thus center our discussion on

Velez's argument that the City                did not adequately train       its

officers on excessive force.2


      2 There is a colorable argument that Velez has waived this
claim.    He mentions excessive force in his failure-to-train
argument only in relation to his retaliatory-arrest claim, rather
than briefing it separately. But because we conclude that Velez's


                                    - 22 -
            On this score, though, Velez's argument is thin.                      When

assessing a city's liability under a failure-to-train theory, we

focus on the "adequacy of the training program in relation to the

tasks the particular officers must perform."                    City of Canton v.

Harris, 489 U.S. 378, 390 (1989).              "If a program does not prevent

constitutional violations, municipal decisionmakers may eventually

be put on notice that a new program is called for."                     Bd. of Cnty.

Comm'rs of Bryan Cnty. v. Brown, 520 U.S. 397, 407 (1997).                         But

Velez   does    not   argue      that    the   City's       use-of-force      training

materials are inadequate.           To the contrary, the record shows that

Manchester police officers receive training on the proper use of

force at the New Hampshire Police Academy.                  The Manchester Police

Department     also   conducts      its     own   use-of-force         training    and

periodically reviews its use-of-force policy.                    And all officers

are required to undergo annual training on various topics related

to law enforcement, including the proper use of force.                    Velez does

not contend otherwise.

            Instead,       Velez    attempts      to    anchor     his        municipal

liability claim in a single incident of alleged misconduct: his

arrest.     But "a pattern of similar constitutional violations by

untrained      employees    is     ordinarily     necessary       to     demonstrate

deliberate     indifference        for    purposes     of    failure     to    train."


failure-to-train argument fails as to excessive force, too, we
assume without deciding that he has preserved it.


                                         - 23 -
Connick, 563 U.S. at 62 (cleaned up); see also St. Hilaire v. City

of Laconia, 71 F.3d 20, 29 (1st Cir. 1995) ("Evidence of a single

incident is usually insufficient to establish a custom or usage."

(cleaned up)).         This is so because "continued adherence to an

approach that [policymakers] know or should know has failed to

prevent tortious conduct by employees may establish the conscious

disregard for the consequences of their action -- the deliberate

indifference      --    necessary         to    trigger        municipal        liability."

Connick, 563 U.S. at 62 (quotation marks and citation omitted).

             Velez     parries     by     invoking         a   theory    of    supervisory

liability:      He points         to Slocum's failure to deescalate the

situation,    the      City's     failure       to       conduct    an       after-the-fact

investigation, and another police officer's approval of Eutzy's

and    Slocum's      uses    of     force       as       evidence       of    "supervisory

encouragement,         condonation        and        even      acquiescence        in    the

unconstitutional practice."               Bordanaro v. McLeod, 871 F.2d 1151,

1157 (1st Cir. 1989) (quotation marks and citation omitted).                             The

fact that the officers "acted in concert," Velez asserts, "is

further   evidence      that      there    was       a    pre-existing        practice   of"

excessive force.        Id. at 1156.

             The mere fact that the officers participated in, or did

not object to, the forcible removal of Velez from his car, however,

does   not   perforce       demonstrate         an       unlawful   municipal      custom.

Indeed, we reaffirmed this principle in Bordanaro.                               There, we


                                          - 24 -
underscored "that evidence of a single event alone cannot establish

a municipal custom or policy," but "where other evidence of the

policy has been presented and the 'single incident' in question

involves the concerted action of a large contingent of individual

municipal employees, the event itself provides some proof of the

existence of the underlying policy or custom."                  Id. at 1156–57.

Unlike in Bordanaro, where the jury was presented with additional,

uncontroverted evidence of a widespread, unlawful arrest practice,

id.   at   1156,    Velez   asks   us    to   infer    a   municipal    custom    of

inadequate       training   from   the    actions     of   officers    during    and

immediately following one incident of arrest.                 Velez points to no

specific training deficiencies responsible for such supervisory

acquiescence.        Nor does he establish "that the lack of proper

training, rather than a one-time negligent administration of the

program or factors peculiar to the officer[s] involved in a

particular incident, is the 'moving force' behind [his] injury."

Brown, 520 U.S. at 407–08.               In other words, Velez's "approach

provides     a     means    for    circumventing       [the    municipal-policy

requirement] altogether."          City of Oklahoma City v. Tuttle, 471

U.S. 808, 823 (1985).

            Velez's state-law claim fails for many of the same

reasons.    Under New Hampshire law, a failure-to-train claim sounds

in negligence.       See Cutter v. Town of Farmington, 498 A.2d 316,

319 (N.H. 1985).       The relevant inquiry "is whether the [officers]


                                     - 25 -
were incompetent, inexperienced or unskilled in a way that caused

injury, the risk of which was within the scope of their employment

and was known to the employer-municipality."        Id. at 320.   The

focal point is not "whether the harm occurred because of the

[officers'] inattention or negligence," but whether the employer-

municipality "had reason to foresee" that the officers would

inflict unwitting harm due to inexperience or incompetence on the

job. Id. Here, Velez marshals no evidence suggesting that Eutzy's

or Slocum's supervisors, or the City more broadly, "knew or should

have known of a risk of [Slocum's] incompetence in the use of

force."   Levy v. Lique, No. 10-cv-00374, 2012 WL 1600174, at *8

(D.N.H. May 7, 2012).   To the contrary, "the uncontested evidence

shows that [the officers] received annual training on the broadly

utilized continuum of force."     Id.    Without more, Velez's state-

law claim cannot succeed.

                                 III.

          For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the judgment in

favor of defendants.    The parties shall bear their own costs.




                                - 26 -