United States Court of Appeals
                     For the First Circuit


No. 24-1414

                      ELIZABETH F. WARNER,

                      Plaintiff, Appellant,

                               v.

                           LOUIS DEJOY,
     Postmaster General of the United States Postal Service,

                      Defendant, Appellee.


          APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
               FOR THE DISTRICT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE

         [Hon. Steven J. McAuliffe, U.S. District Judge]


                             Before

                  Rikelman, Lynch, and Kayatta,
                         Circuit Judges.


     Mark M. Whitney, with whom Kyle E. Cullen and Whitney Law
Group, LLC were on brief, for appellant.
     Michael McCormack, Assistant U.S. Attorney, with whom Jane E.
Young, U.S. Attorney, was on brief, for appellee.


                        September 4, 2025
               KAYATTA, Circuit Judge.         Elizabeth Warner is a federal

postal employee who was passed over for two promotions.                    Believing

that she was denied those positions because of her age and sex,

she sued her employer, the United States Postal Service (USPS).

Warner alleged that USPS discriminated against her in violation of

the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) and Title VII of

the Civil Rights Act.           The district court granted summary judgment

against her.         It held that no reasonable jury could conclude that

USPS's stated reasons for denying Warner the promotions were, in

fact, pretexts for discrimination.

               We agree that Warner's claims of age discrimination fail

as a matter of law.         However, we find that the evidence presents

a    genuine    dispute    of    material     fact   as    to   one   of   her   sex-

discrimination claims.           We therefore affirm in part, and reverse

in   part,     the    district    court's     summary     judgment    order.      Our

reasoning follows.

                                         I.

               In reviewing a grant of summary judgment, we recite the

facts in the light most favorable to Warner, the nonmoving party.

See Sutherland v. Peterson's Oil Serv., Inc., 126 F.4th 728, 734

(1st Cir. 2025).

               Warner's career with the post office began in 1998. Nine

years later, she became a postmaster, and by 2018 she had risen to

the rank of Level 18 postmaster.            In January 2018, she applied for


                                       - 2 -
an open Level 20 postmaster position in Durham, New Hampshire,

which would have yielded a higher salary and improved benefits.

At the time, Warner was 58 years old.            Kathleen Hayes -- Post

Office Operations Manager for the Northern New England District,

and Warner's supervisor -- interviewed Warner for the Durham

position. Warner did not get the promotion. Instead, the position

went to John Minigan, a 36-year-old man.          As the district court

paraphrased, Hayes told Warner that she chose Minigan because he

had "more experience of the sort needed for that particular job."

          Seven months later, in August 2018, Warner applied for

a   different     Level 20   postmaster    position,     this   time   in

Somersworth, New Hampshire.     Again, Hayes conducted the interview.

During the interview, Hayes said to Warner "that the Somersworth

post office had never had a female postmaster, and she wondered

how that would work."     She also questioned whether Warner "had the

energy" to manage the Somersworth office.         Once again, Hayes did

not give Warner the promotion.       Hayes chose a man slightly younger

than Warner instead: 53-year-old David Adams.

          Fearing that she had been denied the promotions because

of her age and gender, Warner complained to an Equal Employment

Opportunity     (EEO)   counselor.      Warner   also   filed   a   formal

discrimination complaint with the USPS National EEO Investigative

Services Office on December 21, 2018. Pursuant to the EEO process,

Warner then requested a formal hearing and investigation at the


                                 - 3 -
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).     Finally, Warner

withdrew her EEOC discrimination charge.     The EEOC dismissed her

case, and Warner sued her employer in federal district court.

          After the parties completed discovery, USPS moved for

summary judgment, arguing that Warner's claims failed as a matter

of law. The district court agreed. It found that USPS had supplied

"legitimate and non[]discriminatory reasons" for choosing Minigan

and Adams over Warner:    Those candidates "had more experience of

the type needed (that is, overseeing city delivery routes), were

better organized, presented themselves more impressively in their

interviews, and had demonstrated superior leadership skills."   And

the court concluded that no reasonable jury could find that USPS's

purported reasons were pretextual.       The court granted summary

judgment against Warner on all counts, and this appeal followed.

                                II.

          We review de novo a district court's decision to grant

summary judgment.   Mullane v. U.S. Dep't of Just., 113 F.4th 123,

130 (1st Cir. 2024).   We construe the evidence "in the light most

favorable to the nonmovant."     Rodríguez-Cardi v. MMM Holdings,

Inc., 936 F.3d 40, 46 (1st Cir. 2019).     And we affirm only if the

record presents "no genuine dispute as to any material fact and

the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law."          Id.

(citation omitted).    A fact is material if it has "the potential

to affect the outcome of the suit under the applicable law," and


                               - 4 -
"dispute[s are] genuine if the evidence about the fact is such

that a reasonable jury could resolve the point in the favor of the

non[]moving party."        Id. at 46–47. (cleaned up).

            With that framework in mind, we assess whether the

district court erred by granting summary judgment on Warner's

claims of discriminatory failure to promote.               We consider first

her claims of age discrimination, and second her claims based on

sex.

                                        III.

            The     ADEA     mandates    that     "[a]ll   personnel     actions

affecting employees . . . who are at least 40 years of age . . .

in the United States Postal Service . . . shall be made free from

any discrimination based on age."              29 U.S.C. § 633a(a).    Notably,

this    provision    holds    federal-sector      employers   to   a   different

standard than private-sector employers, which violate the ADEA

only if they "discriminate . . . because of [an] individual's

age."     Id.     § 623(a)(1)    (emphasis      added).    Under   the    latter

standard, a private-sector plaintiff must show that age was a but-

for cause of her mistreatment, generally by using the burden-

shifting test laid out in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411

U.S. 792, 802-05 (1973).          See Rodríguez-Cardi, 936 F.3d at 47.

But a federal-sector employee need not prove that age was a but-

for cause of the personnel decision she challenges.                      Babb v.

Wilkie, 589 U.S. 399, 402 (2020). Instead, she need only establish


                                        - 5 -
that the decision was "tainted" by discrimination -- that "age

discrimination play[ed] any part in the way a decision [was] made."

Id. at 406.

              In determining whether Warner had shown material facts

in dispute concerning her age-discrimination claims, the district

court, at both parties' urging, applied the McDonnell Douglas

burden-shifting test. It found that Warner had established a prima

facie case of age discrimination.             However, it also found that

USPS had articulated "legitimate and non[]discriminatory reasons"

for declining to promote Warner, thus shifting the burden back to

Warner   to    show     that   the   purported   reasons     were   pretextual.

McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 804–05.               And it concluded that

Warner had failed to do so, because the evidence she proffered

showed "neither pretext nor discriminatory animus."

              Because federal-sector ADEA plaintiffs like Warner need

not show but-for causation, the district court erred by relying on

McDonnell Douglas to reject Warner's age-discrimination claims.

See Babb, 589 U.S. at 402; Buckley v. Sec'y of Army, 97 F.4th 784,

794 (11th Cir. 2024).           However, Warner admits that she invited

this error by "ma[king] a strategic choice" below not to advocate

for   the     correct    standard.      Where    a   party   "intentional[ly]

relinquish[es] or abandon[s] . . . a known right," we typically

treat its argument as waived.           United States v. Olano, 507 U.S.

725, 733 (1993) (citation omitted); see Mullane, 113 F.4th at 132.


                                      - 6 -
To   be   sure,   we   "are   not   bound   to   accept   as   controlling[]

stipulations as to questions of law."            TI Fed. Credit Union v.

DelBonis, 72 F.3d 921, 928 (1st Cir. 1995) (citation omitted).           On

rare occasions, therefore, we have distinguished between waiving

an argument and waiving a position as to the proper construction

of the law to be applied to an otherwise-preserved argument.            See,

e.g., Wadsworth v. Nguyen, 129 F.4th 38, 54–55, 54 n.11 (1st Cir.

2025) (declining to accept parties' assumption that a plaintiff

bringing sexual harassment claims must "establish the existence of

a similarly situated comparator," and instead "applying the proper

test" to determine that plaintiff had stated a viable claim).            But

here, Warner expressly chose to bypass the federal-sector test for

reasons of "strateg[y]," and it is far from clear that she would

prevail even under the more forgiving standard she first eschewed.

Under these circumstances, for purposes of this appeal, we decline

to overlook her waiver of any argument that Babb's more lenient

standard might save her claims.        Cf. Exxon Shipping Co. v. Baker,

554 U.S. 471, 487 n.6 (2008) (explaining that "[t]he reason for

the rules is not that litigation is a game, like golf, with

arbitrary rules to test the skill of the players," but instead

"litigation is a 'winnowing process,' and the procedures for

preserving or waiving issues are part of the machinery by which

courts narrow what remains to be decided" (quoting Poliquin v.

Garden Way, Inc., 989 F.2d 527, 531 (1st Cir. 1993))).


                                    - 7 -
           We turn, then, to the argument Warner pressed before the

district   court:   that    a   jury   could   find,   under    the     familiar

McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework, that "it [was] more

likely than not that the employer's proffered reason for the

adverse employment action was pretextual and that the true reason

was unlawful discrimination."          Joseph v. Lincare, Inc., 989 F.3d

147, 158 (1st Cir. 2021).

           USPS argues that it promoted Minigan over Warner to the

Durham postmaster role because of Minigan's "extensive knowledge

of city delivery and the overall quality of his work as Postmaster

of the Deerfield Post Office."           And it claims that it promoted

Adams over Warner to the Somersworth position because of Adams's

superior "interview performance" and "extensive experience with

city delivery."     In an attempt to show that these reasons were a

pretext for age discrimination, Warner points to the fact that she

was twice passed over for a younger candidate.              She also claims

substantial city-delivery experience, meaningful because Hayes

declared that "productivity in City delivery was one of the most

significant factors" in choosing who to promote.               She highlights

her employee evaluations, which -- arguably contrary to Hayes's

suggestion     that        Warner      struggled       to      manage      city

delivery -- included no negative feedback about Warner's city-

delivery performance.       And she details a series of statements by

Hayes questioning whether Warner had the "energy" to succeed at


                                    - 8 -
the Somersworth office -- statements Warner interpreted as code

for concerns about her age.

          Even   drawing   all   reasonable   factual   inferences   in

Warner's favor, we agree with the district court that no reasonable

jury could find that Hayes's purported reasons for choosing Minigan

and Adams over Warner were a pretext for age discrimination.         As

a threshold matter, the age discrepancy between Warner and the

chosen candidates does not, by itself, create an inference of age

discrimination; if it did, then every age-discrimination plaintiff

would survive summary judgment.     Nor do Hayes's statements about

Warner's "energy," without more, permit the conclusion that Hayes

did not promote her because of Warner's age.      After all, we have

held that the word energy "does not necessarily connote youth or

other age-related characteristics."       Torrech-Hernández v. Gen.

Elec. Co., 519 F.3d 41, 54 (1st Cir. 2008).      And because Warner's

"energy" need not mean her "age," comments about Warner's "energy"

do not show that Hayes considered Warner's age in deciding not to

promote her, at least in the context presented here.1


     1  For these reasons, we also disagree with Warner's claims
that Hayes's stated concerns about Warner's "energy" constitute
direct evidence of age discrimination. Compare Patten v. Wal-Mart
Stores E., Inc., 300 F.3d 21, 25 (1st Cir. 2002) (explaining that
direct   evidence   must   "unambiguously    implicate[]   a . . .
discriminat[ory]   motive"),    with   Zampierollo-Rheinfeldt   v.
Ingersoll-Rand de P.R., Inc., 999 F.3d 37, 55–56 (1st Cir. 2021)
(finding that statements about "rejuvenating" the workforce in the
context of plaintiff's termination could be found to be direct
evidence of discriminatory motive in the context presented).


                                 - 9 -
          Warner also argues that she was more qualified than

Minigan because she had eleven years of postmaster experience to

Minigan's two years and nine months; because her application listed

twenty-seven trainings and Minigan's listed only three; because

she was a member of the City Inspection Team and Minigan was not;

and because she had "numerous years of city delivery experience,"

including at the Durham office itself.       She further suggests that

similar qualifications made her a better candidate than Adams for

the Somersworth post.     But USPS maintains -- and Warner does not

now dispute -- that Minigan was "considered one of the leaders in

city delivery," and that he "worked on many special teams as a

Team Leader for City Delivery Inspections as well as instructed

many trainings for City Delivery," qualifications Warner does not

purport to possess.   As for Adams, the record reflects that he was

previously postmaster in South Berwick, which was "100% city

delivery," and before that supervised the Portsmouth post office,

which "was the largest office in Hayes'[s] group, and consisted of

20–30 city delivery routes."       So, simply put, Warner's city-

delivery qualifications do not indicate a "difference [between

candidates] so stark as to support an inference of pretext."

Rathbun v. Autozone, Inc., 361 F.3d 62, 75 (1st Cir. 2004).

          Warner   also   points   to    several   purported   gaps   and

inconsistencies in Hayes's statements and testimonies.         She argues

that those inconsistencies alone should have saved her from summary


                                - 10 -
judgment, because they could have led a jury to discredit Hayes's

testimony -- and thus to disbelieve her                      alleged reasons for

promoting Minigan and Adams instead of Warner.                     But as we have

often explained, at summary judgment "[i]t is not enough for a

plaintiff   merely      to    impugn      the     veracity    of   the    employer's

justification."     Mesnick v. Gen. Elec. Co., 950 F.2d 816, 824 (1st

Cir. 1991).      Rather, the plaintiff must "elucidate specific facts

which would enable a jury to find that the reason given is not

only a sham, but a sham intended to cover up the employer's real

[discriminatory]     motive."          Id.    (quoting    Medina-Munoz          v.   R.J.

Reynolds Tobacco Co., 896 F.2d 5, 9 (1st Cir. 1990)).                                Put

differently,     Warner      cannot    defeat     summary     judgment     solely     by

questioning the credibility of the USPS decisionmaker in general;

instead, she must point to evidence capable of satisfying her

ultimate burden of proving discrimination.                   See Medina-Munoz, 896

F.2d at 9-10.

            We   have     held    that     where     an   employer       justifies     a

challenged employment decision by relying on a material assertion

it demonstrably knew to be false, that inconsistency can create a

triable issue of fact as to the employer's discriminatory motive.

Joseph, 989 F.3d at 160–61 (holding that the employer's reliance

on a knowingly "false accusation of insubordination" in a "sworn

interrogatory answer" was "material" evidence of discrimination).

Here,   however,    Warner       points      to   inconsistencies        with    little


                                       - 11 -
bearing on Hayes's decision to promote Minigan and Adams over

Warner: a claim, later corrected, that Hayes herself had never

been investigated for discrimination; difficulty remembering the

contents of unrelated meetings; difficulty recalling aspects of

Warner's city-delivery experience; and Hayes's failure to produce

notes or matrices from her interview with Adams.2          None of these

inconsistencies   go   to   the   core   question   of   whether   Hayes's

purported reason for choosing others over Warner -- their superior

skills, experience, and interview performances -- was a pretext

for age discrimination.     Nor has Warner shown anything approaching

the considered reliance on a demonstrably false assertion that we

deemed sufficient in Joseph.      See 989 F.3d at 160–61.



     2  In fact, Hayes stated in an email to the EEO investigator
that she did not interview Adams at all. But neither the parties
nor the district court appear to have noticed this possible
discrepancy. Indeed, when asked at oral argument, Warner's counsel
maintained that the email revealed, at most, a "spoliation issue"
concerning the missing interview notes, and stated that "the record
reflects . . . that Ms. Hayes testified that she did speak with
Mr. Adams."     Following oral argument, Warner submitted a
Rule 28(j) letter confirming that Warner "did not raise any
argument related to [Hayes's] discrepancy concerning whether she
interviewed" Adams, and clarifying that her only argument
concerning the email was that "the District Court improperly relied
on . . . Hayes's credibility in granting summary judgment." For
those reasons, Warner has plainly waived any argument that there
were facts in dispute as to whether the Adams interview took place
at all. She has further waived any argument that such a dispute
might be material under Joseph. See United States v. Zannino, 895
F.2d 1, 17 (1st Cir. 1990) ("[W]e see no reason to abandon the
settled appellate rule that issues adverted to in a perfunctory
manner, unaccompanied by some effort at developed argumentation,
are deemed waived.").


                                  - 12 -
          We therefore agree with the district court that Warner

failed to show material facts in dispute as to her claims of age

discrimination.

                                  IV.

          We turn now to Warner's claims of sex discrimination.

The district court and the parties also applied the McDonnell

Douglas framework to these claims; the parties do so again on

appeal.   We therefore follow their lead, without deciding whether

we would do so were the issue contested on appeal.       But see Huff

v. Buttigieg, 42 F.4th 638, 645 (7th Cir. 2022) (holding that

because "[t]he federal-sector provisions in the ADEA and Title VII

are identical . . . Babb's causation standard applies equally to

[Title VII's federal-sector provisions]").      We limit our inquiry

to the question Warner has presented on appeal:          Applying the

McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework, were there material

facts in dispute as to whether Hayes's purported reasons for

promoting Minigan and Adams over Warner were a pretext for sex

discrimination?

          Because   much   of   Warner's   evidence   relates   to   the

Somersworth promotion, we begin with that claim before considering

the earlier Durham promotion decision.

                                  A.

          Warner argues that the district court erred at the third

step of McDonnell Douglas when it held that no reasonable jury


                                - 13 -
could find that USPS's reasons for denying Warner the Somersworth

promotion were a pretext for sex discrimination.                  In so ruling,

Warner claims, the district court overlooked evidence that could

support a finding of pretext: USPS data that Hayes promoted nearly

twice as many men as women during her career; testimony that in a

2020   meeting,   Hayes   referred   to    a   group   of   six    young,    male

employees as her "smoking hot [Officers in Charge]"; and Hayes's

statement during Warner's Somersworth interview that she "was not

sure that they'd ever had a woman in Somersworth before, and she

wondered how that would work out."         In addition, Warner points to

the same evidence discussed above as to her age-discrimination

claims, including evidence casting doubt on Hayes's credibility

and evidence that Warner was better qualified than the candidates

selected.

            Standing   alone,   we   see   no    probative    value     in    the

demographic data, because Warner has not identified how many men

versus similarly situated women applied for the positions in

question.     Without that information, it is not clear whether

Hayes's history of promoting twenty-three men and only twelve women

can support an inference of discriminatory motive.                   Nor could

Hayes's remark about her "smoking hot" male officers, delivered

more than a year later and in a context far removed from either

promotion decision, support such an inference.               See McMillan v.

Mass. Soc'y for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, 140 F.3d


                                 - 14 -
288, 300 (1st Cir. 1998) (noting that while "stray remarks may

properly constitute evidence of discriminatory intent . . . in

combination    with    other   evidence,"        their   probative     value      "is

circumscribed if they were made in a situation temporally remote

from the date of the employment decision").              And as we have already

explained, neither inconsistent statements from Hayes unrelated to

the challenged promotion decisions, nor Warner's own claim of

superior qualifications, would ordinarily suffice to create a

triable issue of pretext on their own or in combination.

           Hayes's     comments    about    the    feasibility    of     a    female

postmaster in Somersworth, however, raise more serious questions.

USPS contends that Hayes's statement that they had never "had a

woman   [p]ostmaster     in    Somersworth"       was    a   "neutral,       factual

statement devoid of any evidence of gender-based animus."                     Grandy

v. Manhattan & Bronx Surface Transit Operating Auth., No. 16-CV-

6278, 2018 WL 4625768, at *25 (S.D.N.Y. Sept. 26, 2018).                       Maybe

so, but a jury could find that her follow-up, wondering "how that

would work," casts that statement in a different light: It implies

that Hayes harbored doubt that a woman could do that job.                    Drawing

all     factual       inferences     in      Warner's         favor,         Hayes's

statements    --   delivered    during     the    interview    itself,       by   the

acknowledged decisionmaker -- could, when combined with the other,

otherwise insufficient evidence, support a jury conclusion that

Hayes elected not to promote Warner because of Warner's sex.


                                    - 15 -
Hayes's remarks could have been, as USPS argues, merely imprudent

"wonder[ing] aloud," or even a well-meaning warning about the

realities of sexism that Warner might encounter.                 But this factual

uncertainty about the meaning of Hayes's statements -- plainly

material       to     Hayes's     motive        in   denying        Warner    the

promotion -- renders summary judgment inappropriate.                 See Ahmed v.

Johnson, 752 F.3d 490, 502 (1st Cir. 2014) ("Determining which

view more accurately reflects reality requires factfinding and

credibility judgments that are properly the task of a jury.").

              Taken   together,   Warner's       "mosaic    of    circumstantial

evidence" is just enough to warrant a jury trial.                 See id. at 497

(quoting Holland v. Gee, 677 F.3d 1047, 1056 (11th Cir. 2012)).

We therefore reverse the judgment of the district court on Warner's

Somersworth-based sex-discrimination claim.3

                                         B.

              We turn, finally, to Warner's claim that she was denied

the earlier Durham position because of her sex.                   On appeal, she

points   to    largely   the    same    evidence     of    discrimination    that

supported her Somersworth-based claim, including her allegedly

superior qualifications, Hayes's record of misleading statements,


     3  Because we find that Warner's claim survives summary
judgment under the McDonnell Douglas test for indirect evidence,
we need not determine whether Warner has, as she claims, presented
direct evidence of sex discrimination. Nor need we decide whether
the Babb causation standard should be applied to adjudicate this
claim on remand.


                                       - 16 -
and Hayes's statements during the Somersworth interview about the

difficulty a female postmaster might face in Somersworth.

           Warner's evidence here is considerably thinner.   Hayes's

comment during Warner's interview for the Somersworth position

referred specifically to a history of all-male leadership in the

Somersworth office.   At most, then, Hayes's comment reflected her

perception of Warner's suitability for the Somersworth office; it

said nothing about Hayes's views on female postmasters in Durham,

particularly because the evidence reflects no similar history of

male leadership in the Durham office. Her comment does not support

an inference that Hayes's purported reasons for not picking Warner

to lead the Durham office were pretextual and that the real reason

was sex discrimination.   See O'Horo v. Bos. Med. Ctr. Corp., 131

F.4th 1, 15 (1st Cir. 2025) (reiterating that a Title VII plaintiff

must show both pretext and the employer's true, discriminatory

motive).   And without the inference of discriminatory motive from

Hayes's comment, Warner's other evidence of pretext -- the same

evidence she cites for her Somersworth claim -- is not enough to

create a triable issue of fact, for the reasons we have already

explained.   We therefore agree with the district court that Warner

failed to show material facts in dispute as to her claim of sex

discrimination in the Durham promotion decision.




                              - 17 -
                                    V.

          For   the   foregoing    reasons,   we   affirm   the   district

court's grant of summary judgment on Warner's claims of age

discrimination, as well as her sex-discrimination claim concerning

the Durham promotion.   We reverse its grant of summary judgment on

Warner's claim that USPS discriminated based on sex when it did

not choose Warner to run the Somersworth office, and we remand for

further proceedings consistent with this opinion. No costs are

awarded to either party.




                                  - 18 -