23-634
Xerox v. Loc. 14A, Rochester Reg’l Joint Bd., Xerographic Div. Workers United


                                                  In the
                      United States Court of Appeals
                                   For the Second Circuit
                                          _________________

                                        August Term 2023
                                     Argued: February 22, 2024
                                     Decided: February 5, 2025

                                           Docket No. 23-634

                                         XEROX CORPORATION,

                                                                     Petitioner-Appellee,

                                                      v.

                       LOCAL 14A, ROCHESTER REGIONAL JOINT BOARD,
                         XEROGRAPHIC DIVISION WORKERS UNITED,

                                                                   Respondent-Appellant.

                                          _________________

Before:                      WESLEY, CHIN, and LEE, Circuit Judges.
                                          _________________

      Xerox Corporation (“Xerox”) filed a petition, under Section 301 of the Labor
Management Relations Act (“LMRA”), for injunctive and declaratory relief against
Local 14A, Rochester Regional Joint Board, Xerographic Division Workers United
(the “Union”). After the collective bargaining agreement between Xerox and the
Union expired, Xerox terminated retiree benefits. The Union argued that Xerox
could not unilaterally terminate vested benefits and sought to enforce the expired
agreement’s arbitration provision. In its LMRA petition, Xerox sought to stay and
enjoin arbitration.
       The United States District Court for the Western District of New York
(Geraci, J.) granted Xerox’s petition, concluding that the Union’s grievance was
not arbitrable under the parties’ expired collective bargaining agreement. The
district court reasoned that the Union had failed to identify language in the
agreement that could be understood to have promised vested benefits beyond the
agreement’s expiration, and, regardless, the reservation-of-rights clause in plan
documents barred an interpretation that benefits had vested.

       On appeal, the Union argues that the district court erred. We agree. First,
the Union identified language that could be reasonably understood as
guaranteeing benefits beyond the contract’s expiration or as constituting deferred
compensation. Second, the reservation-of-rights clause in plan documents did not
conclusively bar an interpretation that benefits had vested. To discern the parties’
intent, the appropriate trier of fact would need to consult extrinsic evidence.

      Accordingly, we VACATE the district court’s judgment and REMAND for
further proceedings.
                           _________________

FOR PETITIONER-APPELLEE:              TODD R. SHINAMAN (Michael J. Lingle, on the
                                      brief), Nixon Peabody LLP, Rochester, NY.

FOR RESPONDENT-APPELLANT:             MICHAEL DOLCE, Hayes Dolce, Buffalo, NY.
                                _________________

WESLEY, Circuit Judge:

      This appeal concerns the enforceability of an arbitration provision in an

expired collective bargaining agreement (“CBA”). For decades, Xerox and the

Union entered successive CBAs. That pattern has since ceased. In 2018, Xerox and




                                         2
the Union entered what remains their most recent CBA. That CBA expired in 2021;

there has been no successor agreement.

      After the 2018–21 CBA 1 expired, Xerox announced modifications to health

benefits provided to employees who retired before the CBA’s expiration. In

January 2022, Xerox made its modifications effective. By the Union’s count, Xerox

terminated retiree benefits for thousands of retirees and their families. Thereafter,

the Union filed a grievance and demanded arbitration, arguing that the benefits

had vested under a CBA and could not be terminated.

      After denying the grievance and refusing arbitration, Xerox filed a petition

in the district court, under Section 301 of the LMRA, to stay and enjoin arbitration

and for declaratory relief. Xerox argued that, as a matter of law, the Union could

not enforce the 2018–21 CBA’s arbitration provision because it had expired. It

acknowledged that an expired CBA’s arbitration provision remains enforceable to

protect vested rights. But Xerox argued that, here, no retiree benefits had vested

as of the last CBA’s expiration.        The Union disagreed, pointing to various




1
  We refer to this CBA as a “contract” throughout this opinion. To the extent we make
limited reference to any other labor agreements (i.e., prior CBAs), we refer to each using
the title by which it appears in the record. See infra Section I.A.c.
                                            3
provisions, including a survivor benefits’ clause that plan participation “shall

continue . . . until his or her death.” J. App’x at 199, 231. Xerox responded that the

provisions identified by the Union could not be understood as promising vested

benefits beyond the contract’s duration. Xerox also pointed to a reservation-of-

rights clause in plan documents, arguing that it precluded any interpretation that

the agreement had vested benefits.

      The district court agreed with Xerox that the Union’s grievance was not

arbitrable, reasoning that the language identified by the Union could not be

understood to vest retiree benefits beyond the duration of the CBA, and,

regardless, the reservation-of-rights clause barred an interpretation that benefits

had vested.

      The Union argues that the district court erred. We agree. The language

identified by the Union can be reasonably understood as guaranteeing benefits

beyond the contract’s expiration or as constituting deferred compensation. In

addition, the reservation-of-rights clause does not conclusively bar an

interpretation that benefits vested.

      We therefore vacate the district court’s judgment and remand for further

proceedings.

                                          4
                                 BACKGROUND

      I.     Factual Background

           A. The 2018–21 CBA

      In 2018, Xerox and the Union entered their most recent CBA (“the 2018–21

CBA”). The CBA was extensive, covering numerous issues: hours of work, wages,

benefits, strikes, layoffs, seniority, retirement, grievance procedure, and

temporary layoffs, among other topics. Relevant here are the provisions on the

duration of the agreement, grievance procedure, and retirement.

           a. Term of Agreement

      The 2018–21 CBA became effective on June 11, 2018, and “continue[d] in

force and effect until and including September 30, 2021, and thereafter, from year

to year,” unless either party gave timely written notice “of its intention to have

this Agreement changed, altered, amended or terminated.” J. App’x at 77. The

parties later agreed to extend the CBA until November 30, 2021.

           b. Grievance Procedure

      The 2018–21 CBA set out a multi-step “Grievance Procedure” for unresolved

complaints, in which the last step was arbitration. At Steps 1, 2, and 3, the parties

would seek to resolve grievances via meetings and written communications. If a


                                         5
grievance was “not satisfactorily settled at Step 3,” then (at Step 4) it could be

“appealed to arbitration” by timely written notice. J. App’x at 67.

         c. Retirement

      The 2018–21 CBA set forth eligibility requirements and the provision of

benefits for retirees and their dependents in “Schedule H.” Schedule H delineated

four types of benefits: Life Insurance, the Medical Care Plan, the Dental Plan, and

the Flexible Benefit Account.      Schedule H described each of these benefits,

providing specific amounts for deductibles, out-of-pocket expenses, and

allowances, and detailing eligibility for coverage based on date of retirement

eligibility and date of retirement, covering employees yet to retire, as well as those

who had retired years earlier. However, Schedule H also stated that “[t]his

Schedule is intended as an outline only and the benefits described are subject to

the detailed terms and conditions of the actual plans or contracts, as well as to the

provisions of applicable state and federal laws.” J. App’x at 120.

      As to the Medical Care Plan, Schedule H identified three categories of

coverage: employees who had reached retirement eligibility before 1989 would

receive coverage as described in the 1980–83 Labor Agreement; employees who

were not retirement-eligible before 1989 and who retired between 1989 and 1994

                                          6
would receive coverage as described in the 1989–92 Labor Agreement, with some

modifications; and employees who were not retirement eligible before 1989 and

retired after 1994 would receive a “Benefits Allowance.”

      These three coverage categories corresponded to three different plans: (1)

the Xerox Medical Care Plan for Retired Employees (the “Old Plan”); (2) the Xerox

Retiree Health Care Plan (the “New Plan”); and (3) the Xerox Corporation Retiree

Health Reimbursement Plan (the “HRA Flex Plan” or “HRA Plan”). This three-

plan scheme for retiree medical care benefits had originated decades earlier but

had been part of each successive CBA since. The specific plan documents detailing

the three medical care plans were amended and restated over the years; the most

recent versions in the record, and on which both parties rely, are from 2016.

      The 2016 Amendment and Restatement for both the Old Plan and the New

Plan stated that retirees and eligible dependents would continue participating in

their respective plans until the retiree ceased paying contributions or being a

retiree, and, upon a retiree’s death, their spouse or domestic partner, provided

they continued making contributions, would continue as a plan participant “until

his or her death.” J. App’x at 199, 231. The 2016 Amendment and Restatement for




                                        7
each of the three plans—the Old Plan, the New Plan, and the HRA Flex Plan—also

contained reservation-of-rights clauses.

         B. Post-Expiration Events

      The 2018–21 CBA expired on November 30, 2021; the parties have not

entered a successor agreement.

      In December 2021, shortly after the 2018–21 CBA expired, Xerox announced

that it was going to modify health benefits for individuals who retired before the

CBA’s expiration.     Thereafter, the Union submitted a “Grievance Report,”

claiming that Xerox’s plan would “modify and/or terminate benefits which had

accrued and/or vested under the agreement, causing numerous violations of the

CBA, including but not limited to violations of Article VIII and any other

applicable provisions.” J. App’x at 187. (Article VIII of the 2018–21 CBA was the

section on benefits, which incorporated Schedule H on Retirement.)

      Xerox rejected the Union’s grievance, concluding that the “grievance is

without merit because neither the main body of the [CBA] nor the plan documents

incorporated in it by reference contain clear and unambiguous language sufficient

to vest benefits for life under well-established legal precedent.” J. App’x at 9.




                                           8
      The Union sought to arbitrate. Xerox declined, noting that the CBA had

expired, and therefore “there is no arbitration provision currently in effect.” J.

App’x at 10. The Union replied with a “Notice of Intent to Arbitrate,” demanding

that Xerox submit to arbitration.

      In the meantime, Xerox implemented its plan to modify retiree benefits. By

the Union’s count, more than 2,000 retirees and relatives lost their health and life

insurance benefits as a result.

         II.    Procedural Background

      Upon receiving the Union’s “Notice of Intent to Arbitrate,” Xerox turned to

the district court. Xerox filed a petition, under Section 301 of the LMRA, and a




                                         9
motion, both seeking to enjoin and permanently stay the arbitration, and

requesting declaratory relief. 2

       Xerox argued that the Union could not arbitrate its grievance, as a matter of

law, because the 2018–21 CBA’s arbitration provision expired with the CBA, and

the grievance did not involve “any action taken by Xerox that infringes upon any

right that accrued or vested under the CBA.” J. App’x at 11. According to Xerox,

the 2018–21 CBA “lacks clear and unambiguous language sufficient to vest any

benefits for the life of the retiree,” and, in any event, the incorporated plan

documents contained “clear and unequivocal reservation of rights language

permitting Xerox to amend, suspend, or terminate the plan at any time and for any

reason.” Id.




2
  Under Section 301(a) of the LMRA, district courts have jurisdiction over “[s]uits for
violation[s] of contracts between an employer and a labor organization.” 29 U.S.C.
§ 185(a). However, a party need not allege a violation by the opposing party to properly
invoke Section 301(a) jurisdiction. Black-Clawson Co., Paper Mach. Div. v. Int’l Ass’n of
Machinists Lodge 355, Dist. 137, 313 F.2d 179, 181 (2d Cir. 1962). As here, Section 301(a)
jurisdiction lies over an action that “alleges compliance with the contract and requests
protection by declaratory judgment against improper demands for arbitration.” Id. at
182; cf. Textron Lycoming Reciprocating Engine Div., Avco Corp. v. United Auto., Aerospace &
Agric. Implement Workers of Am., Int’l Union, 523 U.S. 653, 658 (1998) (holding that Section
301(a) jurisdiction “does not lie” when the party bringing suit “neither alleges that [the
other party] has violated the contract, nor seeks declaratory relief from its own alleged
violation”).
                                            10
      Xerox also argued, among other things, that there was “no valid agreement

to arbitrate any grievance brought by the Union on behalf of retirees” because the

2018–21 CBA’s “Grievance Procedure” only covered “employees,” not retirees. J.

App’x at 11.

      The Union filed an answer, moved to dismiss Xerox’s petition, and cross-

moved to compel arbitration and for injunctive relief pending resolution of

arbitration.   The Union argued that plan documents, including the 2016

Restatements of the Old Plan and the New Plan, “contain[ed] language ‘capable of

reasonably being interpreted’ as vesting language, and the dispute must be

resolved by the trier of fact.” J. App’x at 942. The Union pointed to the participant

eligibility and “surviving spouse” clauses, arguing that they promised benefits for

the retiree until the retiree died or got another job, and promised benefits for

eligible surviving dependents until their death. The Union also argued that the

pre-65 “Benefits Allowance” was “fixed under the contract but as yet unsatisfied.”

J. App’x at 948. As to the reservation-of-rights language, the Union argued that it

had not been incorporated into the 2018–21 CBA because “the CBA is an

independent source of retiree benefits and employer contributions to those

benefits.” J. App’x at 956.

                                         11
      The district court granted Xerox’s petition and motion to stay arbitration

and for declaratory relief, and denied the Union’s motions. The district court

agreed with Xerox that “the retiree health benefits did not vest pursuant to the

CBA and, thus, [Xerox]’s modification of those benefits after the expiration of the

CBA is not subject to the CBA’s arbitration provision.” Xerox Corp. v. Loc. 14A,

Rochester Reg’l Joint Bd., No. 22-CV-6219-FPG, 2022 WL 17822137, at *5 (W.D.N.Y.

Dec. 20, 2022).

      The district court reasoned that the “references to a retiree’s ‘death’” in the

Old Plan and New Plan were insufficient to infer that retiree benefits “vested for

life.” Id. at *4. It noted that the “use of a retiree’s actuarily calculated life

expectancy” to determine benefits under the HRA Plan did “not show an intent to

vest such a benefit” because the “life expectancy language is but one of several

factors used to calculate a retiree’s benefit allowance under the HRA [P]lan.” Id.

Moreover, “in the absence of ‘clear and express’ [vesting] language,” the inclusion




                                         12
of “‘reservation of rights’ language” supported the conclusion that the dispute was

not arbitrable. 3 Id. at *5. The district court entered judgment for Xerox.

       The Union timely moved to alter the judgment pursuant to Federal Rule of

Civil Procedure 59(e), arguing that this Court’s decision in Local Union 97, IBEW v.

NRG Energy, Inc., 53 F.4th 42 (2d Cir. 2022) was an intervening change in

controlling law. The court denied the Union’s Rule 59(e) motion, concluding that

NRG Energy had “at most, clarified the legal standard,” and confirming that it had

applied that standard: its prior decision had determined that the Union “did not

meet its burden of identifying ‘written language capable of reasonably being

interpreted’ to create a promise to vest.” J. App’x at 1109. This appeal followed.

                                     DISCUSSION

       I.     Legal Standards

       Because “an expired contract has by its own terms released all its parties

from their respective contractual obligations,” an expired CBA, like any expired

contract, is generally unenforceable. Litton Fin. Printing Div., Litton Bus. Sys., Inc.



3
 The district court also concluded that declaratory relief was warranted, stating that (1)
the CBA “did not vest lifetime retiree health benefits past the duration of the CBA”; (2)
there was “no existing agreement to arbitrate the issues or claims set forth in [the Union]’s
arbitration request”; and (3) the Union’s grievance was “not arbitrable under the now-
expired CBA.” Xerox, 2022 WL 17822137, at *5.
                                             13
v. NLRB, 501 U.S. 190, 206 (1991). However, “structural provisions relating to

remedies and dispute resolution—for example, an arbitration provision—may in

some cases survive in order to enforce duties arising under the contract.” Id. at

208. In Litton, the Supreme Court explained that

      [a] post[-]expiration grievance can be said to arise under the contract
      only where it involves facts and occurrences that arose before
      expiration, where an action taken after expiration infringes a right
      that accrued or vested under the agreement, or where, under normal
      principles of contract interpretation, the disputed contractual right
      survives expiration of the remainder of the agreement.

Id. at 205–06.

      When a party claims that a right vested under a CBA, “[i]n this Circuit, to

reach a trier of fact, an employee does not have to ‘point to unambiguous language

to support a claim. It is enough to point to written language capable of reasonably

being interpreted as creating a promise on the part of the employer to vest the

recipient’s benefits.’” Am. Fed’n of Grain Millers v. Int’l Multifoods Corp., 116 F.3d

976, 980 (2d Cir. 1997) (alterations adopted) (quoting Schonholz v. Long Island Jewish

Med. Ctr., 87 F.3d 72, 78 (2d Cir. 1996)). In other words, when the CBA’s language

is “reasonably susceptible to interpretation as a promise” to vest, the “ultimate

determination . . . should be left to a trier of fact, likely assisted by extrinsic



                                         14
evidence to clarify the meaning of th[e] ambiguous language.” Devlin v. Empire

Blue Cross & Blue Shield, 274 F.3d 76, 84–85 (2d Cir. 2001).

       If a party successfully points to written language capable of reasonably

being interpreted as vesting benefits and also argues that its vesting claim is

arbitrable, then the trier of fact to which the vesting claim would proceed is the

arbitrator. As our former colleague Judge Pooler once noted, courts “need not

determine the merits to find that the grievance is arbitrable.” NRG Energy, 53 F.4th

at 55. 4 Rather, courts need decide only whether the union identified “written




4 In NRG Energy, this Court examined not only the enforceability of an expired arbitration
provision, but also the scope of an arbitration provision, or whether it applies to the type
of dispute at issue. 53 F.4th at 50–55. In considering the scope issue, NRG Energy applied
a two-step framework, classifying the arbitration clause as broad or narrow, and if broad,
applying a presumption of arbitration. Id. at 49–50. Xerox argues that “there is good
reason to doubt that NRG Energy’s application of a presumption withstands scrutiny
under Supreme Court precedent.” Appellee’s Br. at 22. Xerox points us to Local Union
97, IBEW v. Niagara Mohawk Power Corp., 67 F.4th 107, 113 (2d Cir. 2023) (per curiam), in
which this Court clarified our standard for invoking a presumption of arbitrability in
light of the Supreme Court’s decision in Granite Rock Co. v. International Brotherhood of
Teamsters, 561 U.S. 287 (2010). To the extent Niagara Mohawk’s clarification is relevant to
this case, it relates to Xerox’s secondary argument that, regardless of post-expiration
enforceability, the CBA’s grievance procedure did not apply to retirees—an argument the
district court did not yet reach, and one which we do not address here. For now, we are
concerned only with whether language in the CBA could be reasonably interpreted to
have vested benefits, such that its arbitration provision could be enforced post-expiration.
In these circumstances, applying a presumption of vesting would amount to applying a
presumption of arbitrability. But we do not apply a presumption of vesting; rather, we
apply ordinary principles of contract interpretation. See infra at 16–18.
                                            15
language capable of reasonably being interpreted as creating a promise on the part

of the employer to vest the recipient’s benefits.” Id. (quoting Devlin, 274 F.3d at

83). If so, then the underlying vesting claim proceeds to the arbitrator—as the trier

of fact—to conclusively resolve whether benefits had vested, consulting extrinsic

evidence if necessary. See id.

      Of course, if the written language of the agreement is not capable of

reasonably being interpreted to vest benefits, then the vesting dispute is done. In

concluding that the dispute is not arbitrable, the court necessarily decides the

underlying merits of the vesting claim. As the Supreme Court explained in Litton,

if the CBA’s language “cannot be said to create a right that vested or accrued

during the term of the Agreement,” 501 U.S. at 210, then the court’s “decision that

the dispute does not arise under the Agreement does, of necessity, determine

that . . . the employees lacked any vested contractual right,” id. at 210 n.4.

      Ordinary principles of contract law come into play in determining whether

the language in question is capable of being reasonably interpreted to vest benefits.

See M & G Polymers USA, LLC v. Tackett, 574 U.S. 427, 435 (2015); CNH Indus. N.V.

v. Reese, 583 U.S. 133, 139 (2018) (per curiam). In Tackett, the Supreme Court clarified

that courts must “interpret [CBA]s . . . according to ordinary principles of contract

                                          16
law, at least when those principles are not inconsistent with federal labor policy.”

574 U.S. at 435. Courts cannot “plac[e] a thumb on the scale in favor of vested

retiree benefits.” Id. at 438. Rather, there must be “record evidence” supporting

that inference. Id. at 439. And “when a contract is silent as to the duration of

retiree benefits, a court may not infer that the parties intended those benefits to

vest for life.” Id. at 442.

       In Reese, the Supreme Court again emphasized that courts must “apply

ordinary contract principles” when evaluating whether a CBA vested benefits. 583

U.S. at 139. There, the Sixth Circuit had “found ambiguity” by “erroneously

presum[ing] lifetime vesting from silence.” Id. at 137–39. The Court explained

that “when a contract is ambiguous, courts can consult extrinsic evidence to

determine the parties’ intentions,” but a CBA is “not ambiguous unless, after

applying established rules of interpretation, it remains reasonably susceptible to

at least two reasonable but conflicting meanings.” Id. at 139 (alteration adopted)

(internal quotation marks omitted). Mere silence is insufficient to find ambiguity.

Id. at 140.

       To enforce an expired CBA’s arbitration provision premised on the CBA’s

promise of vested benefits, we therefore require specific language, not simple

                                        17
silence, that can be reasonably interpreted, under ordinary principles of contract

law, as a promise to vest. There is no blanket presumption of vesting. See, e.g.,

NRG Energy, 53 F.4th at 55; Devlin, 274 F.3d at 84, 85; Multifoods, 116 F.3d at 980. If

we determine that the matter is arbitrable, then the arbitrator, as the trier of fact,

makes the ultimate determination as to whether benefits vested, consulting

extrinsic evidence if necessary. See NRG Energy, 53 F.4th at 55; Devlin, 274 F.3d at

83.

      We review a district court’s interpretation of a contract, including an expired

CBA, de novo. Kelly v. Honeywell Int’l, Inc., 933 F.3d 173, 178 (2d Cir. 2019). “[W]e

first consider whether the [C]BA contains language vesting retiree . . . benefits. If

so, we consider whether other contractual provisions—such as a reservation of

rights clause—defeat vesting.” Id. at 179.




                                          18
      II.    Vesting Language

      The Union identified language or incorporated language in the 2018–21

CBA capable of reasonably being interpreted as creating a promise on the part of

Xerox to vest retiree benefits. 5 The district court erred in concluding otherwise.

      A. Durational Language in the Old Plan and New Plan

      Although contractual obligations generally cease upon termination of the

CBA, parties may provide that “certain benefits continue after the agreement’s

expiration.” Tackett, 574 U.S. at 442 (quoting Litton, 501 U.S. at 207). To support a

claim that an agreement promised vested benefits that would extend past the

contract’s expiration, a party may point to written language that “tie[s] the benefits

that a recipient will receive to that recipient’s lifetime or to an indefinite duration.”

Kelly, 933 F.3d at 180. “For example, contractual language stating that retirees’ life

insurance benefits will remain at a stated level ‘for the remainder of their lives’ can



5
  Xerox and the Union disagree about which of their past CBAs and plan documents the
Union may rely upon in seeking to identify vesting language. Xerox argues that only the
language in the 2018–21 CBA (and incorporated plan documents) are properly
considered in this dispute, while the Union contends that we should also consider the
language of earlier expired CBAs (and incorporated plan documents). Because we
conclude that the Union identified language in the 2018–21 CBA (and incorporated plan
documents) that could be reasonably interpreted to vest benefits, we need not and do not
resolve whether the Union could also rely on language in earlier documents, either
principally or as extrinsic evidence.
                                           19
reasonably be interpreted to ‘create a promise to vest lifetime life insurance

benefits.’” Id. (alteration adopted) (quoting Devlin, 274 F.3d at 85).

      Here, the Union identified the following language in the 2016 Amendment

and Restatement for both the Old Plan and New Plan, which the parties agree was

incorporated by reference in Schedule H of the CBA:

         [E]ach Retiree . . . continues participation in the Plan . . . until the
         earlier of the date on which the Retiree ceases to pay the
         contributions . . . or the close of business on the day the Retiree
         ceases to be a Retiree . . . .

J. App’x at 197 (emphasis added); see also J. App’x at 199, 224, 229.

         In the event of the death of a Retiree while a Participant under this
         Plan . . . the Eligible Dependent Spouse or domestic partner of such
         Retiree shall continue as a Participant in the Plan until his or her
         death.

J. App’x at 199, 231 (emphasis added). The Union argued that these clauses vested

benefits by guaranteeing them until an event that could occur after the 2018–21

CBA’s expiration, namely when the Retiree ceases to pay the contributions, ceases

to be a Retiree, or when the Retiree’s surviving spouse or domestic partner dies.

      This Court has previously considered similar, but not identical, language.

In Joyce v. Curtiss-Wright Corp., 171 F.3d 130 (2d Cir. 1999), we considered language

providing for the “‘termination’ of retiree insurance upon a retiree’s ‘death or

                                          20
attaining the age at which he becomes or could become eligible for Medicare.’” Id.

at 134. We concluded that this language could not “reasonably be read as binding

[the employer] to vest the benefits at issue.” Id. The retirees had “fail[ed] to

identify language that affirmatively operates to imply vesting.” Id. at 135.

         By contrast, in Kelly, we had “little trouble” concluding that a bargaining

agreement contained “affirmative lifetime language.” 933 F.3d at 180. There, we

concluded that language providing that “retired employees and surviving spouses

shall continue to receive” medical coverage “for the life of the retiree or surviving

spouse” showed “the parties’ intent to secure medical coverage for qualifying

retirees’ lifetimes.” Id. (emphasis omitted).

         The language the Union identified here is capable of reasonably being

interpreted as a promise to vest benefits. Joyce and Kelly turned on whether there

was “affirmative” language that implied vesting. Joyce, 171 F.3d at 135; Kelly, 933

F.3d at 180. This distinction explains why the negative implication that benefits

would “terminate upon death” failed to indicate vesting in Joyce, while the

affirmative implication that benefits “shall continue for life” did point to vesting in

Kelly.




                                          21
      It follows that, in this case, the affirmative language stating that a surviving

spouse “shall continue” as a plan participant “until” death, and that living retirees

“continue” as participants “until” they stop contributing or being retirees, could

be reasonably interpreted as vesting benefits beyond the CBA’s expiration. As in

Kelly, this language could be read to affirmatively “assign a specific duration to

retirees’ medical coverage that extends beyond the duration of the contract[].” 933

F.3d at 183.

      In concluding that the language here is capable of reasonably being

interpreted to promise vested benefits that extend beyond the CBA’s expiration,

we find support from our sister circuits. The Fifth and Eighth Circuits have

described “until death” language as “highly probative of [an] intent to vest

benefits.” Int’l Ass’n of Machinists & Aerospace Workers v. Masonite Corp., 122 F.3d

228, 232 (5th Cir. 1997) (quoting Anderson v. Alpha Portland Indus., Inc., 836 F.2d

1512, 1518 (8th Cir. 1988)); see also Tackett, 574 U.S. at 444 (Ginsburg, J., concurring)

(confirming that relevant to determining “whether the parties intended retiree

health-care benefits to vest” would be a “‘survivor benefits’ clause instructing that

if a retiree dies, her surviving spouse will continue to receive the retiree’s health-




                                           22
care benefits until death or remarriage” (alterations adopted) (internal quotations

omitted)).

      Similarly, the Fourth and Ninth Circuits have reasoned that “where a CBA

links eligibility for a particular right ‘to an event that would almost certainly occur

after the expiration of the agreement’—e.g., turning 65 or becoming eligible for

Medicare—such linkage ‘signals the parties’ intent to continue retirement health

benefits notwithstanding expiration.’” Alday v. Raytheon Co., 693 F.3d 772, 785 (9th

Cir. 2012) (quoting Quesenberry v. Volvo Trucks N. Am. Retiree Healthcare Benefit

Plan, 651 F.3d 437, 441 (4th Cir. 2011) (alteration adopted)); see also Poore v. Simpson

Paper Co., 566 F.3d 922, 924, 927 (9th Cir. 2009) (holding that where “coverage

would continue until the retiree ‘became eligible for Medicare, attained age 65, or

until death, whichever occurs first,’” the retirees “stated at least a colorable claim

that they have a right to benefits which survived the expiration of the remainder

of the agreement” (alterations adopted)).

      Xerox points us to Grove v. Johnson Controls, Inc., 694 F. App’x 864 (3d Cir.

2017), and Crown Cork & Seal Co. v. Int’l Ass’n of Machinists & Aerospace Workers,

501 F.3d 912 (8th Cir. 2007). But in those cases, the Third and Eighth Circuits

merely concluded that the language “continues until your death” was not

                                          23
“necessarily” or “explicit[ly]” vesting language, and thus did not consider, as we

do here, whether other language in the contract rendered a vesting interpretation

unreasonable. Grove, 694 F. App’x at 868 (“[T]he phrases referring to a retiree’s

‘death’ are not necessarily durational in nature . . . .”); Crown Cork, 501 F.3d at 918

(holding that the provision promising coverage “until death” was “not explicit

vesting language”). Only after considering other language in the agreements did

those courts conclude that the “continues until your death” language had failed to

vest lifetime benefits. Crown Cork, 501 F.3d at 918; Grove, 694 F. App’x at 869–70;

see also Cherry v. Auburn Gear, 441 F.3d 476, 483–86 (7th Cir. 2006) (similarly

reasoning that other contract terms may reveal that “lifetime benefits” were not

“vested benefits”).

      Even the Sixth Circuit, perhaps the greatest skeptic of the idea that language

that “promises to ‘continue’ providing benefits” amounts to a promise of vested

benefits beyond the contract’s duration, recognizes the possibility that it may.

Cooper v. Honeywell Int’l Inc., 884 F.3d 612, 620 (6th Cir. 2018). In Cooper, the Sixth

Circuit considered language providing that benefits would continue “until age 65”

and emphasized that “when a CBA provision promises to ‘continue’ providing

benefits, we can assume only it guarantees benefits until the agreement expires,

                                          24
nothing more.”    Id. (alteration adopted) (internal quotation marks omitted).

However, the Sixth Circuit clarified that there was “no hard-and-fast rule that a

provision cannot delineate eligibility for retiree benefits during the CBA’s

operation and also serve to vest benefits beyond the CBA’s duration,”

acknowledging that there could be “clues . . . from the CBA supporting that

intent.” Id.

      To be sure, we do not understand any circuit to have suggested that

promising to continue benefits until death, or some other future event, is absolute

or always vesting language. Nor do we today. Our task is only to see if it is a

reasonable conclusion. Here, providing coverage that will “continue until death,”

or until some other event likely to occur after the CBA’s expiration, can be

reasonably, though not necessarily, interpreted to promise vested benefits that

extend beyond the CBA’s expiration.

      B. Deferred Compensation in the HRA Flex Plan

      The Union also argued that language in the CBA’s description of the HRA

Flex Plan was capable of being reasonably interpreted to have vested benefits,

during the term of the 2018–21 CBA, that remained yet unsatisfied. Schedule H




                                        25
provided that for certain “Pre-65 retirees,” the “Benefits Allowance” consisted of

the “Basic Allowance” and the following:

      To the Basic Allowance will be added a Service Component in an
      amount equal to $20 times total years of service with the Company up
      to a maximum of 30 years and a LifeCycle Assistance Program
      Component based on the employee’s forfeited balance in the
      LifeCycle Assistance Program spread over the retiree’s expected
      lifetime using accepted actuarial assumptions (this amount will be
      included in the retiree’s Benefits Allowance each year).

J. App’x at 121. The Union argued that this provision provided for a “Benefits

Allowance” that accrued or vested during the term of 2018–21 CBA because it

increased with additional years of service and could be the result of having chosen

to save a benefit for retirement instead of spending it while employed. We

conclude that the Union’s interpretation is a reasonable one.

      The Supreme Court has recognized that a benefit or pay may “constitute[] a

form of deferred compensation that created a right that vested or accrued during

the term of the agreement.” NRG Energy, 53 F.4th at 50. In Nolde Brothers v. Local

No. 358, Bakery & Confectionery Workers Union, 430 U.S. 243 (1977), the Supreme

Court held that a “[u]nion’s claim for severance pay under the expired collective-

bargaining agreement is subject to resolution under the arbitration provisions of

that contract.” Id. at 255. The union had argued that the severance pay was “in

                                        26
the nature of ‘accrued’ or ‘vested’ rights, earned by employees during the term of

the contract on essentially the same basis as vacation pay, but payable only upon

termination of employment.” Id. at 248. Notable support for “the [u]nion’s

position that severance pay was nothing more than deferred compensation” was

“[t]he fact that the amount of severance pay to which an employee [was] entitled

under the collective-bargaining agreement varie[d] according to the length of his

employment and the amount of his salary.” Id. at 248 n.4.

      By contrast, in Litton, the Supreme Court rejected a union’s attempt to

characterize a layoff provision as deferred compensation. 501 U.S. at 209–10.

There, the agreement provided that “in case of layoffs, lengths of continuous

service will be the determining factor if other things such as aptitude and ability

are equal.” Id. at 209. The union in Litton argued that this consideration of

seniority “create[d] a form of earned advantage, accumulated over time, that can

be understood as a special form of deferred compensation for time already

worked.” Id. The Supreme Court disagreed, explaining that the layoff order “was

to be determined primarily with reference to ‘other factors such as aptitude and

ability,’” which “do not remain constant, but change over time,” and “cannot be




                                        27
said to vest or accrue or be understood as a form of deferred compensation.” Id.

at 210.

      Here, we conclude that the “Benefits Allowance” provision is capable of

being reasonably interpreted as “constitut[ing] a form of deferred compensation

that created a right that vested or accrued during the term of the agreement.” NRG

Energy, 53 F.4th at 50. The allowance is increased by a “Service Component” that

equals $20/year of service, with a 30-year cap. Thus, as with the severance pay

considered in Nolde, the “Benefits Allowance” to which an eligible pre-65 retiree is

“entitled under the collective-bargaining agreement varies according to the length

of his employment.” See 430 U.S. at 248 n.4.

      Also added was the “LifeCycle Assistance Program Component,” which

consisted of the remaining balance in the employee’s “LifeCycle” account,

disbursed yearly based on their actuarial life expectancy. Because the “LifeCycle”

account was a benefit available during employment, but could be used for

retirement if the employee retired before age 65, we conclude that it too could be

reasonably viewed as deferred compensation for work already performed.

      The district court, however, rejected the Union’s “contention that the use of

a retiree’s actuarily calculated life expectancy” vested benefits, reasoning that the

                                         28
“life expectancy language is but one of several factors used to calculate a retiree’s

benefit allowance under the HRA plan.” Xerox, 2022 WL 17822137, at *4. Xerox

agrees.

      We agree that an agreement’s use of an actuarial calculation of life

expectancy, alone, does not suggest a promise to vest lifetime benefits. But this

fails to confront the Union’s argument here. The Union views the “Benefits

Allowance” for pre-65 retirees as the severance pay in Nolde, emphasizing that it

was dependent on the retiree’s years of service, as well as on benefits that a retiree

earned and saved while employed.

      The district court was also correct to observe that the allowance had

multiple components. But here, the only other component was the simple addition

of another fixed-dollar amount set by the CBA. The order of layoffs in Litton was

not deferred compensation because it primarily considered factors that “cannot be

measured on some universal scale, but only by matching an employee to the

requirements of an employer’s business at that time.” 501 U.S. at 210. Unlike

Litton’s layoff provision, the allowance’s incorporation of years of employment or

remaining unused benefits was not conditional, discretionary, or based on a

subjective assessment.

                                         29
       Because the total “Benefits Allowance” for pre-65 retirees varies based on

length of employment and a balance of benefits that accrued during employment,

we conclude that it is capable of being reasonably understood as deferred

compensation that vested during the term of the 2018–21 CBA. 6

       III.   Reservation-of-Rights Language

       The 2016 Amendment and Restatement for each of the three plans—the Old

Plan, the New Plan, and the HRA Flex Plan—contained the following reservation-

of-rights clause:

              The Company specifically reserves the right to amend,
              suspend or terminate the Plan described herein at any
              time and for any reason.


6 The Union also argues that the retiree life insurance provision could be reasonably
interpreted to have vested life insurance benefits for life. The district court did not
explicitly consider this argument, apparently because it was not raised below, or at least
before the district court had entered judgment. In any event, we disagree. The Union
relies on NRG Energy, which this Court decided shortly before the district court entered
judgment. In NRG Energy, this Court concluded that a union’s dispute over
“‘grandfathered’ life insurance” was arbitrable under an expired agreement because it
could be reasonably interpreted as a promise to vest life insurance benefits. 53 F.4th at
54–55. Here, though, the life insurance provision does not include the term
“grandfathered” or any other durational language. The Union’s argument relies solely
on the nature of life insurance, in that it is not payable until death. NRG Energy does not
help. NRG Energy was clear that “other than the word ‘grandfathered’ there [was] no
specific durational language indicating that the life insurance benefit vests for life.” Id.
at 55. By the Union’s logic, a grant of life insurance for a limited duration could
nevertheless be interpreted to extend beyond that duration. Under ordinary principles
of contract law, this cannot be.
                                            30
J. App’x at 206, 238, 279. The district court agreed with Xerox that, even if the

2018–21 CBA could otherwise be interpreted to vest benefits, this reservation-of-

rights clause barred a conclusion that benefits vested. We are not convinced.

       This Court has considered how a reservation-of-rights clause affects the

possibility that an employer still promised vested benefits, but not in

circumstances quite like these. 7 In Multifoods, we considered a union’s argument

that the summary plan description (“SPD”) for a welfare benefits plan had

provided vested retiree benefits. 116 F.3d at 982–83. Because the parties had CBAs

stating that the employer would provide medical insurance to retirees and that the

“SPD supplied the terms of that coverage,” the retirees’ Section 301 claims arising

out of the CBAs would “succeed or fail based on the language of the SPD.” Id. at

982. Ultimately, we concluded “that the SPD could not reasonably be interpreted

as promising vested benefits.” Id. (Unlike this case, the union identified no

affirmative durational language or anything suggesting deferred compensation.)




7
  In Kelly, we considered a company’s argument that “a benefit-specific cancellation
clause . . . prevent[ed] the retirees’ medical benefits from vesting and [was] the functional
equivalent of a reservation of rights clause.” 933 F.3d at 180. But we concluded that the
cancellation clause did not in fact reserve the company’s right to terminate or amend
benefits. Id. at 182.
                                             31
      Although this conclusion was “sufficient to dispose of [the] plaintiffs’

argument, we note[d] that the SPD also expressly reserved [the employer]’s right

to ‘terminate’ the plan,” and observed “that if an employer has not promised

vested benefits in a SPD, and the employer expressly reserves the right to

terminate the plan in the SPD, benefits promised in the SPD are not vested.” Id.

We noted, however, that we were “not faced with the question of how a document

should be interpreted when it includes a general statement that all the benefits

provided under the plan could be amended or terminated but also includes

specific terms which could reasonably be interpreted as promising vested retiree

benefits.” Id. at 982–93. Because the SPD “could not reasonably be interpreted as

promising vested benefits,” we did not address “whether a specific promise of

vested benefits can be defeated by a general reservation of the right to amend or

terminate a plan.” Id. at 983.

      Later, in Abbruscato v. Empire Blue Cross & Blue Shield, 274 F.3d 90 (2d Cir.

2001), we considered a contractual vesting claim brought by retirees under the

Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”), arising solely out of

plan documents and communications, not a CBA. One group of retirees relied on

a single SPD. Confronted with “SPD language that both appears to promise

                                        32
lifetime life insurance coverage . . . and clearly reserves [the employer]’s right to

amend or terminate such coverage,” we decided the question left open in

Multifoods. Id. at 99. “Because the same document that potentially provided the

‘lifetime’ benefits also clearly informed employees that these benefits were subject

to modification, we conclude[d] that the language contained in the [SPD] [was]

not susceptible to an interpretation that promises vested lifetime life insurance

benefits.” Id.

      However, another group of retirees relied on materials that were

“susceptible to interpretation as a promise of vested benefits.” Id. at 98. Like the

SPD, these materials included both a provision of lifetime benefits and a reservation

of rights, but, unlike the SPD, the reservation-of-rights provisions were not

“unambiguous.”      Id.   For example, the “Voluntary Separation Opportunity

Program” (“VSOP”) provided for a “lifetime” life insurance benefit, but also

“reserve[d] the right to amend and/or terminate the VSO Program at any time for

any purpose.”      Id. at 97.    We concluded that this reservation did not

“unambiguously reserve[] [the employer]’s right to reduce the life insurance

benefits provided by the VSOP.” Id. at 98. Instead, we reasoned that “this

language [was] capable of being interpreted to mean that [the employer] merely

                                         33
reserved the right to change the program for those individuals who have not

already retired under the terms described, not the right to alter the described

benefits for those individuals who had retired under those terms.” Id.

      Here, if the Union’s vesting claim arose exclusively out of the plan

Restatements, our reasoning in Abbruscato would likely dictate that the

reservation-of-rights clause barred an interpretation that other language in the

same Restatement promised vested benefits. As with the SPD in Abbruscato, the

reservation-of-rights is unambiguous within the Restatement itself—it clearly

states that Xerox can “amend, suspend or terminate the Plan described herein at any

time and for any reason.”      J. App’x at 206, 238, 279 (emphasis added); see

Abbruscato, 274 F.3d at 98–99 (considering SPD clause providing that the company

“reserves its right to amend each of the Plans at any time” (emphasis omitted)).

      But the Union’s claim that its retirees are entitled to vested benefits does not

arise solely out of the plan Restatements; rather, the Union argues that its retirees

are entitled to vested benefits under the CBA. In relation to a bargained-for

agreement—which outlined retiree benefits that would be “subject to the detailed

terms and conditions of the actual plans or contracts”—the reservation-of-rights

clause in the plan Restatements—permitting Xerox to nevertheless modify or

                                         34
terminate “the Plan described herein at any time and for any reason”—fails to

remain unambiguous. J. App’x at 120, 206, 238, 279.

      The district court and Xerox point us to cases in other circuits. But reviewing

those cases confirms our conclusion that the combination of language we have

here, in these circumstances, is ambiguous. The varying reasoning from our sister

circuits indicates that there are a number of different ways to read a plan’s

reservation-of-rights clause consistently with a CBA, and here, it is unclear which

of these interpretations the parties intended.

      For starters, some circuits have concluded that CBA language cannot be

interpreted to guarantee vested benefits past the CBA’s expiration when an

incorporated plan document includes a reservation-of-rights clause. In Cooper,

cited by the district court, the Sixth Circuit considered a union’s claim that a

collective bargaining agreement had promised benefits beyond the agreement’s

expiration, until age 65. 884 F.3d at 614. The Sixth Circuit rejected the claim,

concluding that a reservation-of-rights clause in an incorporated medical plan was

“manifestly inconsistent with vesting” because “by definition, vested benefits may

not be unilaterally terminated.” Id. at 621. The Sixth Circuit chose to read the

reservation-of-rights clause “consistently with the CBA,” which, according to the

                                         35
Sixth Circuit, meant that the employer “retains the right to terminate retiree

healthcare benefits, but only after the expiration of the [CBA].” Id.

      In Crown Cork, the Eighth Circuit reasoned that a plan’s reservation-of-rights

provision defeated a union’s claim that a survivor benefits’ clause, promising that

benefits would continue until death, had vested benefits in a collective bargaining

agreement. 501 F.3d at 918. And in Grove, the Third Circuit concluded that “‘broad

and unequivocal’ reservation of rights clauses require us to resolve the vesting

analysis in the company’s favor,” and therefore, even assuming that “phrases

referring to an [a]ppellant’s ‘death’ are durational in nature, the collective

bargaining agreements’ ‘reservation of rights clauses overcome the promise of

lifetime benefits.’” 694 F. App’x at 869 (alterations adopted) (quoting In re Unisys

Corp. Retiree Med. Benefit “ERISA” Litig., 58 F.3d 896, 903-04 & n.11 (3d Cir. 1995)).

      The Fifth Circuit, however, has exercised greater caution, recognizing that

“a reservation-of-rights clause in a plan document, which allows a company to

amend or terminate a plan at any time, cannot vitiate contractually vested or

bargained-for rights.” Hunter v. Berkshire Hathaway, Inc., 829 F.3d 357, 363 (5th Cir.

2016) (internal quotation marks omitted). “To conclude otherwise would allow

the company to take away bargained-for rights unilaterally.”            Id.   The Fifth

                                         36
Circuit’s observation originated in a case like that here—a union argued that

retiree benefits had vested under a CBA where there was “until death” language

in an incorporated benefits agreement, while the employer relied on a plan

document’s reservation-of-rights clause to argue that the benefits were not vested.

Masonite, 122 F.3d at 233. In Masonite, the Fifth Circuit reasoned that “[i]n the

absence of the CBAs, the Plan’s reservation-of-rights clause granting the company

the right to amend or terminate the Plan might well end the inquiry in the

company’s favor. A reservation-of-rights clause in a plan document, however,

cannot vitiate contractually vested or bargained-for rights.” Id. The Fifth Circuit

concluded that the “until death” language was ambiguous as to vesting, and

consideration of extrinsic evidence of intent was necessary. Id. If the agreement

had in fact “vested retiree benefits,” then the reservation-of-rights clause could not

“divest retired employees of those benefits.” Id.

      Like the Fifth Circuit, the Ninth Circuit has recognized the complexity of

trying to square a reservation-of-rights clause, permitting unilateral modification

and termination, with a bargained-for agreement. The Union points us to Alday v.

Raytheon, 693 F.3d 772 (9th Cir. 2012), in which the Ninth Circuit concluded that a

CBA had incorporated plans’ reservation-of-rights provisions only with respect to

                                         37
some, but not all, aspects of the benefit scheme. Id. at 795. Because the clauses

referred only to the “Plan” and “Benefit Program,” and not the CBAs, their scope

was “limited to the Plans and incorporated Benefit Programs.” Id. at 791. The

Ninth Circuit concluded that “[t]he CBAs leave the designation of the precise

medical benefits provided, and the procedures for obtaining them, to the Plans,

and the Plans permit the Employer to modify the Plans accordingly.” Id. at 791–

92. But the Plan provisions did not affect, because they did “not purport to affect,

the contribution obligations imposed by the CBAs.” Id. at 791.

      Xerox urges us to conclude that the 2018–21 CBA’s incorporation of the

plans’ “detailed terms and conditions” included the “reservation of rights,” and

that the reservation “appl[ied] to the benefits ‘outlined’ in the CBA,” such that it

eliminates an interpretation that benefits vested. Appellee’s Br. at 36. But Xerox

fails to explain why we should equate the ability to modify or terminate “the Plan

described herein” with the ability to modify or terminate benefits outlined, or

incorporated as “terms and conditions,” in the CBA. J. App’x at 120, 206, 238, 279.

Moreover, accepting Xerox’s preferred interpretation of the reservation-of-rights

clause would suggest that, even during the term of the 2018–21 CBA, Xerox could

have terminated bargained-for retiree benefits. The language does say “at any

                                        38
time and for any reason.” J. App’x at 206, 238, 279. This would suggest that the

CBA’s promise of retiree benefits was illusory, meaning Xerox’s performance

under the CBA was purely a function of whim. See 3 R. Lord, Williston on Contracts

§ 7:7 (4th ed. 2024) (describing illusory promises).

      In general, courts “avoid constructions of contracts that would render

promises illusory because such promises cannot serve as consideration for a

contract.” Tackett, 574 U.S. at 440. We share the Fifth Circuit’s hesitancy to

understand “a reservation-of-rights clause in a plan document, which allows a

company to amend or terminate a plan at any time, [to] vitiate contractually vested

or bargained-for rights.” Hunter, 829 F.3d at 363 (internal quotation marks omitted).

      To be sure, it may be possible to collectively bargain for a “privilege that

could be unilaterally abrogated at the employer’s discretion.” Alday, 693 F.3d at

790 n.20; see also Tackett, 574 U.S. at 441 (“[A] promise that is ‘partly’ illusory is by

definition not illusory.”). For example, in United Mine Workers v. Brushy Creek Coal

Co., 505 F.3d 764 (7th Cir. 2007), the Seventh Circuit considered a CBA promising

benefits “for life” and a plan’s reservation-of-rights clause, and concluded that the

union had bargained for “lifetime” retiree benefits that could be terminated by the

employer at any time. Id. at 767. The Seventh Circuit explained that “[t]erminable

                                           39
benefits for life are benefits that go on regardless of the age of the worker or how

long ago he retired, but that cease if the plan conferring those benefits ends.” Id.

      But in Brushy Creek, the CBA had explicitly stated that “the specific

provisions of the plans will govern in the event of any inconsistencies between the

general description and the plans.” Id. Here, the CBA does not contain a similarly

“broad subordination clause.” See Alday, 693 F.3d at 790 n.20 (noting that a CBA

could provide for a “privilege that could be unilaterally abrogated at the

employer’s discretion,” either “explicitly or through a broad subordination clause

such as the one in Brushy Creek,” but declining to “read such an authorization into

a CBA when it does not appear there”).

      For its part, the Union suggests that it never agreed to the incorporation of

the reservation-of-rights clause. But just as we are not convinced that we may

simply conclude that the reservation-of-rights clause was incorporated wholesale

to allow unilateral termination of retiree benefits at any time, we are not convinced

that we may simply conclude that the reservation-of-rights clause was not

incorporated at all. Perhaps one of these interpretations is correct, but overall, we

are confronted with ambiguity. There are numerous reasonable ways to interpret

the language and terms we have here, and it is unclear from the language alone

                                         40
which of these interpretations the parties intended. See Reese, 583 U.S. at 139

(noting that a contract is ambiguous if “[it] remains reasonably susceptible to at

least two reasonable but conflicting meanings”).

      Because the reservation-of-rights clause merely states that Xerox can modify

or terminate “the Plan described herein,” we could surmise, as did the Ninth

Circuit when faced with similar language, that the clause could plausibly be

interpreted to mean that Xerox may “modify the benefits plans so long as such

modifications are reasonably commensurate with the benefits originally provided

under the CBA.” Alday, 693 F.3d at 788 n.18. Another possible interpretation is

that suggested by the Sixth Circuit—that Xerox could modify or terminate the

plans, but only after the CBA’s expiration. See Cooper, 884 F.3d at 621. And yet

another possible interpretation is that suggested by the Fifth Circuit and our

reasoning in Abbruscato—that Xerox could modify or terminate the plans at any

time, but not benefits that had already accrued or vested. See Hunter, 829 F.3d at

363; Masonite, 122 F.3d at 233; Abbruscato, 274 F.3d at 98. In this scenario, the clause

could be interpreted to mean that Xerox “merely reserved the right to change” the

Plan “for those individuals who ha[d] not already retired under the terms

described, not the right to alter the described benefits,” either in the text of the

                                          41
CBA itself or as incorporated, “for those individuals who had retired under those

terms.” Abbruscato, 274 F.3d at 98.

      A more specific CBA or reservation-of-rights clause could have clarified the

parties’ intent. But here, how a court would know, without consulting extrinsic

evidence, that the parties intended one of these reasonable interpretations and not

another is unclear to us.     See Tackett, 574 U.S. at 438–39 (cautioning against

assessments “too speculative and too far removed from the context of any

particular contract to be useful in discerning the parties’ intention”).

      In sum, we cannot read this CBA and say with certainty whether or not the

parties intended vested retiree benefits. We conclude, however, that the Union

has identified language capable of being reasonably interpreted to promise vested

benefits that extend beyond the CBA’s duration, or that constitute deferred

compensation, and we are not persuaded that the broad reservation-of-rights

clause in the plan Restatements resolves the ambiguity. To discern the parties’

intent here, consulting extrinsic evidence of intent may be necessary. If the

Union’s grievance is indeed arbitrable, this would be a task for the arbitrator. 8


8
  Because we conclude that the Union identified language capable of being reasonably
interpreted to have vested retiree benefits, we vacate the district court’s judgment. We

                                          42
                                   CONCLUSION

      For the reasons set forth above, we VACATE the district court’s judgment

and REMAND for further proceedings.




therefore need not and do not reach the Union’s additional argument that the district
court’s entry of declaratory judgment was procedurally improper. As previously noted,
we also decline to reach Xerox’s alternative argument that the CBA’s grievance procedure
cannot be invoked by retirees. See supra at 15 n.4. On remand, the district court may
consider this and any other remaining issues in the first instance.
                                          43