FOR PUBLICATION

     UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
          FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

YUGA LABS, INC.,                                    No. 24-879
                                                     D.C. No.
               Plaintiff - Appellee,
                                                 2:22-cv-04355-
                                                    JFW-JEM
    v.

RYDER RIPPS; JEREMY CAHEN,                           OPINION

               Defendants - Appellants.

         Appeal from the United States District Court
            for the Central District of California
          John F. Walter, District Judge, Presiding

           Argued and Submitted August 15, 2024
                   Pasadena, California

                       Filed July 23, 2025

    Before: Bridget S. Bade and Danielle J. Forrest, Circuit
        Judges, and Gonzalo P. Curiel, District Judge. *

                    Opinion by Judge Forrest


*
 The Honorable Gonzalo P. Curiel, United States District Judge for the
Southern District of California, sitting by designation.
2                     YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


                          SUMMARY **


                     Intellectual Property

    The panel affirmed in part and reversed in part the
district court’s judgment, and remanded, in an action under
the Lanham Act and the Anticybersquatting Consumer
Protection Act concerning the Bored Ape Yacht Club
nonfungible token (NFT) collection created by Yuga Labs,
Inc.
    Yuga sued Ryder Ripps and Jeremy Cahen, creators of a
nearly identical NFT collection called “Ryder Ripps Bored
Ape Yacht Club,” for trademark infringement and unlawful
cybersquatting. Defendants countersued Yuga under the
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) and also sought
declaratory relief that Yuga had no copyright protection over
the Bored Apes. The district court dismissed defendants’
declaratory-judgment counterclaims for lack of subject-
matter jurisdiction and granted summary judgment for Yuga
on its two claims and defendants’ DMCA counterclaim.
After a bench trial on remedies, the district court enjoined
defendants from marketing, promoting, or selling products
that use the Bored Ape Yacht Club marks, and awarded
Yuga over $8 million for disgorgement of profits, statutory
damages, attorney fees, and costs.
     The panel held that an NFT can be trademarked because
it is a “good” under the Lanham Act, which protects marks
used with “any goods or services.” The panel concluded that
the statutory text did not establish that NFTs are

**
  This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
                   YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                3


categorically excluded from protection under the Lanham
Act, and neither did Dastar Corp. v. Twentieth Century Fox
Film Corp., 539 U.S. 23 (2003), and Slep-Tone Ent. Corp. v.
Wired for Sound Karaoke and DJ Servs., LLC, 845 F.3d
1246 (9th Cir. 2017) (per curiam), because unlike the
intangible content at issue in those cases, NFTs are not
contained in or even associated with tangible goods. Rather,
consumers purchase NFTs as commercial goods in online
marketplaces specifically curated for NFTs.
    The panel concluded that defendants’ NFTs were
“goods” under the Lanham Act. The panel also concluded
that Yuga had trademark priority because it was the first to
use the Bored Ape Yacht Club marks in commerce and did
not lose that priority either because it engaged in unlawful
conduct in using the marks to sell unregistered securities or
because it gave up its trademark rights when selling its
NFTs.
    The panel nonetheless reversed the district court’s grant
of summary judgment for Yuga on its trademark-
infringement and cybersquatting claims because Yuga did
not prove as a matter of law that defendants’ actions were
likely to cause consumer confusion. The panel concluded
that defendants’ use of Yuga’s marks did not constitute
nominative fair use and was not “expressive work” protected
by the First Amendment. As to the trademark claim,
applying the Sleekcraft factors, the panel concluded that
some of the factors indicated a likelihood of confusion, some
did not, and some were neutral. Thus, viewing the facts and
reasonable inferences therefrom in the light most favorable
to defendants, the panel could not conclude as a matter of
law that a reasonably prudent consumer in the marketplace
was likely to be confused as to the origin of the goods
bearing Yuga’s marks. As to the cybersquatting claim, Yuga
4                  YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


did not establish as a matter of law that defendants’ domains
were “confusingly similar” to Yuga’s protected marks.
    The panel affirmed the district court’s rejection of
defendants’ counterclaims, concluding that there was no
genuine dispute of fact as to the DMCA claim and that the
district court properly dismissed the claims for declaratory
relief with prejudice.




                        COUNSEL

Todd R. Gregorian (argued), Molly Melcher, Anthony M.
Fares, Zachary A. Kalinowski, and Ethan M. Thomas,
Fenwick & West LLP, San Francisco, California; Kimberly
Culp and Eric J. Ball, Fenwick & West LLP, Mountain
View, California; for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Louis W. Tompros (argued), Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale
and Dorr LLP, Boston, Massachusetts; Derek A. Gosma and
Henry M. Nikogosyan, Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and
Dorr LLP, Los Angeles, California; Nicholas Werle, Wilmer
Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP, New York, New York;
Thomas G. Sprankling, Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and
Dorr LLP, Palo Alto, California; Kyle T. Edwards, Wilmer
Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP, San Francisco,
California; for Defendants-Appellants.
Laura L. Chapman, Sheppard Mullin Richter & Hampton
LLP, Los Angeles, California; James Gatto, Sheppard
Mullin Richter & Hampton LLP, Washington, D.C.; Kara C.
Michels, Neal Gerber & Eisenberg LLP, Chicago, Illinois;
Debbie L. Berman, Jenner & Block LLP, Chicago, Illinois;
Rémi Jaffré, Jenner & Block LLP, New York, New York;
                   YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS               5


Martin Schwimmer, Leason Ellis LLP, White Plains, New
York; for Amicus Curiae International Trademark
Association.



                        OPINION

FORREST, Circuit Judge:

    Plaintiff-Appellee Yuga Labs, Inc. created one of the
most widely recognized nonfungible token (NFT)
collections—the Bored Ape Yacht Club (BAYC). Each NFT
in this collection is associated with a unique cartoon Bored
Ape. Purchasers of these NFTs obtain not only rights to the
ape art but also membership in what has been described as a
“strange combination of gated online community, stock-
shareholding group, and art-appreciation society.” As the
Bored Ape NFTs swung from meme to million-dollar
merchandise with a celebrity following, Defendants-
Appellants Ryder Ripps and Jeremy Cahen created a nearly
identical NFT collection called “Ryder Ripps Bored Ape
Yacht Club” (RR/BAYC). This NFT collection is associated
with the exact same Bored Ape cartoons as Yuga’s NFTs.
    Yuga sued Defendants alleging that they infringed its
BAYC trademarks in violation of the Lanham Act and
committed unlawful cybersquatting in violation of the
Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act (ACPA).
Defendants countersued Yuga for violating the Digital
Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), alleging that Yuga
made misrepresentations in its take-down notices, and also
sought declaratory relief that Yuga has no copyright
protection over the Bored Apes. The district court dismissed
6                   YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


Defendants’ declaratory-judgment counterclaims for lack of
subject-matter jurisdiction and granted summary judgment
for Yuga on its two claims and Defendants’ DMCA
counterclaim. It then held a bench trial on remedies and
permanently enjoined Defendants “from marketing,
promoting, or selling products or services . . . that use the
BAYC Marks,” and awarded Yuga over $8 million for
disgorgement of profits, statutory damages, attorney fees,
and costs.
    In resolving the issues raised on appeal, we must first
address whether NFTs can be trademarked. As we consider
that question, we are mindful that when we apply
“established legal rules to the ‘totally new problems’” of
emerging technologies, our task is “not to ‘embarrass the
future.’” TikTok Inc. v. Garland, 604 U.S. --, 145 S. Ct. 57,
62 (2025) (quoting Nw. Airlines, Inc. v. Minnesota, 322 U.S.
292, 300 (1944)). Grappling with this nascent technology,
we hold that Yuga’s NFTs are not merely monkey business
and can be trademarked. Nonetheless, we reverse the district
court’s grant of summary judgment for Yuga on its
trademark-infringement and cybersquatting claims because
it has not proven as a matter of law that Defendants’ actions
are likely to cause consumer confusion. We affirm the
district court’s rejection of Defendants’ counterclaims.
                     BACKGROUND
                   I. What is an NFT?
    Simply stated, even if not simply understood, an NFT is
an intangible, fully virtual, authenticating software code that
is associated with separate digital or physical content. See
Hannah Bobek, Note, To Mint or Not to Mint: Non-Fungible
Tokens and the Right of Publicity, 92 Fordham L. Rev. 639,
651 (2023). Like other non-fungible assets, each NFT is
                    YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                 7


unique. And the association of an NFT with otherwise
fungible digital content transforms that content into a unique
asset. Id. This is called “tokenizing.” Id.
    By way of analogy, consider an autographed baseball. If
the ball was mass-produced, many people could have the
exact same ball. But when one of the balls is signed by a
Major League player, the signature transforms it into a
unique good with greater value than the other identical-but-
unsigned balls. NFTs work this way in cyberspace. The
autograph on the ball is like the authenticating software code
on the digital art file. The digital file may be replicable,
allowing many people to access the same piece of art. But
attaching the software code to the digital file makes
something that is otherwise commonplace, unique. And that
uniqueness can confer value.
     “NFTs can tokenize anything, such as digital art, avatars,
video game wearables, digital fashion accessories, and
music.” Id. (footnotes omitted). But they are primarily used
for selling digital art because they “provide a way to create
artificial scarcity in the digital art market.” Andrew C.
Michaels, Confusion in Trademarked NFTs, 7 Stan. J.
Blockchain L. & Pol’y 1, 2 (2024). To be clear, the
underlying digital artwork or other content tokenized by an
NFT may or may not, by itself, be exclusive, copyrightable,
or subject to any ownership interest at all. But the pairing of
authenticating software code with digital content can create
a unique asset with proprietary value. See Bobek, supra, at
652 (“At its essence, NFTs bring unique assets into the
digital space and make ownership of that asset verifiable.”
(quoting An P. Doan, Mark W. Rasmussen, Joshua B.
Sterling & Harriet Territt, NFTs: Key U.S. Legal
Considerations for an Emerging Asset Class, Fintech L.
Rep. (2021))); see also Hermès Int’l v. Rothschild, 654 F.
8                  YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


Supp. 3d 268, 278 (S.D.N.Y. 2023) (“Individuals do not
purchase NFTs to own a ‘digital deed’ divorced from any
other asset: they buy them precisely so that they can
exclusively own the content associated with the NFT.”).
    The process by which NFT creators tokenize content is
called “minting.” Bobek, supra, at 651–52. When an NFT is
minted, it is stored on a “blockchain.” Id. at 652. A
blockchain is a public digital leger “that keeps track of who
owns what.” Michaels, supra, at 5. “The block is a list of
recorded transactions; the chain is transactions recorded with
a hash that chains[,] or links, preceding blocks with new
blocks.” Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) Briefing Paper, Nat’l
Archives & Recs. Admin. 4 (Apr. 2024). Think of real
property deed records maintained by county recorders’
offices. Just like with recorded land transactions, a
blockchain records the creation and initial conveyance of the
NFT and all subsequent conveyances of that NFT.
    Blockchains allow “ownership of the NFT to be
transferred and authenticated electronically without the need
for a physical item or a trusted third party, such as a bank.”
Michaels, supra, at 5. So long as the computers have “the
appropriate software,” id. at 5–6, the blockchain “ledger is
maintained across the computers of all blockchain users
through a peer-to-peer network,” Dr. Thibault Schrepel,
Collusion by Blockchain and Smart Contracts, 33 Harv. J.L.
& Tech. 117, 119 (2019). For example, when one person
transfers an NFT to another, a record of the transaction
becomes permanently stored on the blockchain. See Joseph
B. Fazio, 1 Internet L. & Practice § 1:28 (Oct. 2024). In this
way, a blockchain is a transparent cyberspace ledger
between transacting parties.
                    YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                  9


    The minting, storage, and transfer of NFTs on a
blockchain are accomplished through a “smart contract.”
Edward Lee, NFTs As Decentralized Intellectual Property,
2023 U. Ill. L. Rev. 1049, 1076 (2023); see also Risley v.
Universal Navigation Inc., 690 F. Supp. 3d 195, 202
(S.D.N.Y. 2023) (describing smart contracts as “programs
that write the terms of the agreement between the buyer and
seller of tokens directly into the program’s code”), aff’d in
part, vacated in part No. 23-1340-cv, 2025 WL 615185 (2d
Cir. Feb. 26, 2025). A smart contract is not a contract in the
legal sense; it is an “automatically executing computer
code.” Jean Bacon et. al., Blockchain Demystified: A
Technical and Legal Introduction to Distributed and
Centralised Ledgers, 25 Rich. J.L. & Tech. 2, 93 (2018). In
other words, a smart contract is essentially a computer
program “that automatically brings about some specified
action, such as carrying out transfers of, or executing other
actions relating to, digital assets according to a set of pre-
specified rules.” Id. at 86. As a result, smart contracts can be
used to automate agreements between parties according to
the instructions written into their code.
                  II. Factual Background
              A. The Bored Ape Yacht Club
    Yuga created the BAYC NFT collection, which is one of
the most widely recognized NFT collections in the world.
Yuga created this collection through a smart contract
recorded on the blockchain Ethereum. Each BAYC NFT
includes a sequential unique identifier called an “Ape ID.”
    There are 10,000 NFTs in the BAYC collection, each
associated with its own original artwork featuring a cartoon
Bored Ape (see below). Yuga also created a website,
bayc.com, to promote and sell the BAYC NFTs.
10                YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS




    Yuga began selling its BAYC NFTs in April 2021. By
the following month, Yuga had sold the entire collection.
Yuga’s average price for a BAYC NFT was about $200, and
it made over two million dollars in its initial offering.
    Yuga’s Terms and Conditions (T&Cs) governing the
NFT sales conferred “the underlying Bored Ape, the Art,
completely.” That is, buyers received both personal and
commercial rights to use the underlying artwork (i.e., the
“Bored Ape” image) free of royalty fees. Additionally, each
BAYC NFT doubled as a membership pass. BAYC NFT
owners— “Ape holders”—joined an online and offline
social club through which they could access benefits,
including interactive digital spaces, branded merchandise,
and events featuring musical performances by prominent
performers. One publication described this internet-age
social club as a “strange combination of gated online
community, stock-shareholding group, and art-appreciation
society.”
    Yuga has used several images, logos, and brand
signifiers to promote its website, events, services, and
products, including its BAYC NFT collection: “BORED
APE YACHT CLUB,” “BAYC,” “BORED APE,” the
BAYC Logo, the BAYC BORED APE YACHT CLUB
                     YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                     11


Logo, and the Ape Skull Logo (collectively, the BAYC
Marks). 1 Examples of the BAYC logo and branded
merchandise are below:




    The BAYC NFTs commanded increased press and
celebrity attention as their values soared in the secondary
market, with some selling at auction for as much as $24.4
million. 2 Yuga then collaborated with companies like
Adidas to feature BAYC Marks on clothing, consumer
goods, and other products. But the popularity came at a cost.
Yuga has invested substantial resources in protecting its
intellectual property.




1
  The parties disagree about whether these brand signifiers are valid
trademarks, or “marks,” under the Lanham Act.
2
 Yuga earns a 2.5% royalty on every BAYC NFT sold on the secondary
market.
12                    YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


        B. Defendants’ RR/BAYC NFT Collection
    Defendant Ryder Ripps is a visual and conceptual artist
and designer who, in his own words, “aims to dismantle the
porous boundaries between art, the internet, and commerce,
agitating the structure of the attention economy and
revealing the flow of power in online relationships.” In late
2021, he began criticizing Yuga for using “neo-Nazi
symbolism, alt-right dog whistles, and racist imagery in their
company and in the [BAYC NFTs].” He criticized Yuga, its
product, and celebrity promoters in interviews with
investigative journalists, on social media and podcasts, and
on his website, gordongoner.com, where he “compil[ed] the
information [he] found for the public to view and discuss.” 3
For example, according to Ripps, the BAYC ape skull logo
resembles the Totenkopf emblem of the Nazi Schutzstaffel
(SS). On the gordongoner.com website, Ripps used art to
satirize the BAYC brand and expose purported Nazi imagery
embedded in the BAYC logo, an example of which is shown
below.




3
 Gordon Goner is BAYC co-creator Wylie Aronow’s online handle. The
BAYC creators’ identities were unknown, other than their online
handles, until they were identified in a BuzzFeed article published in
February 2022.
                      YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                     13


    In May 2022, Ripps and Defendant Jeremy Cahen
partnered to create the NFT collection Ryder Ripps Bored
Ape Yacht Club (RR/BAYC). The RR/BAYC NFTs are
linked to the same ape images and corresponding Ape IDs as
Yuga’s BAYC NFT counterparts. Compare the BAYC ape
image on the left with the RR/BAYC ape image on the right,
both identified as #1058:




    Ripps initially used Foundation (a digital, artist-centric
NFT marketplace) 4 to mint the RR/BAYC collection. The
collection was ultimately hosted on (or digitally embedded
into) an Ethereum blockchain smart contract that contains
unique lines of code, including smart contract addresses
(digital locations on the blockchain ledger), contract
creators, metadata, and creation dates. When Ripps created
the RR/BAYC NFT collection by embedding entries in the
smart contract, he assigned the contract name as the “Bored
Ape Yacht Club” and the contract symbol as “BAYC” for
each NFT in his collection. The name and symbol
identification inputs cannot be changed; they are built into
the NFTs themselves.
     The NFT metadata in smart contracts is “accessible
to . . . anyone using a searchable blockchain explorer.”

4
  NFT marketplaces are platforms where NFTs can be stored, displayed,
traded, and in some cases, created. Prominent NFT marketplaces include
Foundation, OpenSea, Rarible, and LooksRare.
14                 YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


Kristen E. Busch, Cong. Rsch. Serv., R47189, Non-Fungible
Tokens (NFTs) 1, 4–5 (2022). One such tool is Etherscan.
See id. at 3, 5 n.18. Etherscan publicly tracks NFTs,
including sales, and produces reports detailing metadata
information from Ethereum blockchain-based smart
contracts. See id. Customers can use those reports to verify
the authenticity and provenance of their NFTs. See id. Yuga
claims that “[n]othing in [Defendants’] counterfeit NFTs or
the underlying smart contract referred consumers to any
disclaimer identifying them as fakes or to any commentary
about Yuga or BAYC.” According to Yuga, the similarity of
the information between its BAYC NFTs and Defendants’
RR/BAYC NFTs caused Etherscan “to identify
[Defendants’] NFTs with Yuga’s marks” and “tricked bots”
into reporting RR/BAYC NFT sales as BAYC NFT sales.
     C. Marketing and Sale of the RR/BAYC NFTs
    Defendants created the website rrbayc.com to promote
and sell their RR/BAYC NFT collection. Potential buyers
could “reserve” an RR/BAYC NFT at rrbayc.com based on
the Ape ID of the corresponding BAYC NFT. The website
provided the following “artist statement” for potential
buyers:
                       YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                       15




The rrbayc.com website also featured a link to
gordongoner.com, which criticized the BAYC NFTs as
racist and an example of “simianization”— “disparaging
someone by comparing them to an ape/monkey.”
    Defendants primarily sold the RR/BAYC NFTs through
rrbayc.com and, to a lesser extent, through Twitter. Each
RR/BAYC NFT sold for $100 to $200. Defendants refer to
these direct sales (initiated by Defendants on platforms they
operate and control) as “primary market sales.” 5 Defendants



5
 Yuga disputes that there is an identifiable or distinct “primary market”
for RR/BAYC NFTs that can be separated from the “secondary market.”
16                YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


made over $1.36 million by selling out their entire
RR/BAYC collection.
    Like their BAYC NFT counterparts, RR/BAYC NFTs
were also sold on secondary NFT marketplaces by third
parties. Notably, RR/BAYC NFTs were listed on the
Foundation secondary NFT marketplace beginning in May
2022, when the RR/BAYC NFTs were first minted. The
Foundation page prominently displayed the header “Bored
Ape Yacht Club” in large text and identified the username
“@ryder_ripps” in much smaller text. The page also used the
acronym “BAYC” and included Yuga’s BAYC Ape Skull
logo without alteration. And Defendants advertised the
Foundation page on Twitter. At least one other secondary
NFT marketplace sold RR/BAYC NFTs under the name
“Bored Ape Yacht Club.”
    Defendants promoted secondary-market sales of
RR/BAYC NFTs on their personal Twitter pages by linking
to marketplaces that prominently featured the “Bored Ape
Yacht Club” name, logo, and BAYC acronym. In separate
posts on Twitter, Defendants also shared the RR/BAYC
“artist statement.” Ripps posted RR/BAYC NFT listings
referencing BAYC Marks for approximately two months on
Foundation. In late June 2022, Foundation and other
secondary marketplaces removed RR/BAYC pages after
Yuga sent a series of takedown notices. All in all, RR/BAYC
NFTs were available for purchase across numerous NFT
marketplaces at various periods, and Defendants earned over
$100,000 in royalties from secondary market sales.
    Defendants also registered the website apemarket.com to
offer their own marketplace where Yuga’s BAYC NFTs and
the RR/BAYC NFTs could be sold side-by-side. Defendants
previewed ApeMarket on their social media pages, created a
                    YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                17


Twitter account for ApeMarket indicating the market would
“go live within 24 hours of the final [RR/BAYC] mint,” and
addressed ApeMarket advertisements to the “Yuga
Community.” However, ApeMarket never went live due to
Yuga’s lawsuit.
               III. Procedural Background
    Yuga sued Defendants in June 2022. It asserted eleven
federal and state-law claims for: (1) trademark infringement
based on a false-designation-of-origin theory in violation of
the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1125(a); (2) false advertising
in violation of the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1125(a);
(3) cybersquatting in violation of the ACPA, 15 U.S.C.
§ 1125(d); (4) common law trademark infringement;
(5) common law unfair competition; (6) unfair competition
in violation of Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 17200 et seq.;
(7) false advertising in violation of Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code
§ 17500 et seq.; (8) unjust enrichment; (9) conversion;
(10) intentional interference with prospective economic
advantage; and (11) negligent interference with prospective
economic advantage.
     Defendants asserted numerous defenses, including that
Yuga does not have enforceable trademark rights and, even
if it does, their use of the BAYC Marks was protected under
the nominative fair-use doctrine and the First Amendment.
Defendants        also     countersued    for:     (1) knowing
misrepresentation of infringing activity in violation of the
DMCA, 17 U.S.C. § 512(f); (2) declaratory judgment of no
copyright under 17 U.S.C. §§ 102(a) and 204(a);
(3) intentional infliction of emotional distress; (4) negligent
infliction of emotional distress; and (5) declaratory
judgment of no defamation. Defendants also filed an anti-
18                       YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


SLAPP motion to strike 6 and a motion to dismiss. The
district court denied Defendants’ anti-SLAPP motion and its
motion to dismiss, except as to Yuga’s unjust-enrichment
claim. The district court also rejected Defendants’ First
Amendment and fair-use defenses.
    Defendants appealed. In an unpublished decision, we
affirmed, concluding that “[t]he district court correctly
determined that the anti-SLAPP motion failed . . .
because Yuga Labs’ claims did not arise from
acts Ripps took in furtherance of his right of free speech.”
Yuga Labs, Inc. v. Ripps, No. 22-56199, 2023 WL 7123786,
at *1 (9th Cir. Oct. 30, 2023).
     In March 2023, Yuga moved for summary judgment on
its false-designation-of-origin and cybersquatting claims, as
well as on Defendants’ defenses and DMCA counterclaim.
The district court granted summary judgment for Yuga on
those three issues. In relevant part, the district court “easily
conclude[d] that Defendants’ use of Yuga’s BAYC Marks
was likely to cause confusion” and that Defendants
intentionally infringed Yuga’s BAYC Marks. The court then
set a bench trial to determine the scope of infringement
liability and remedies. Following the pretrial conference,
Yuga dismissed its Lanham Act false-advertising claim and
all of its state-law claims, and it withdrew its demand for
legal remedies, including up to $800 million in monetary
damages. It proceeded to trial only on its demand for


6
  California’s anti-SLAPP statute requires a court to strike “[a] cause of
action against a person arising from any act of that person in furtherance
of the person’s” free-speech rights “in connection with a public
issue . . . , unless the court determines that the plaintiff has established
that there is a probability that the plaintiff will prevail on the claim.” Cal.
Code Civ. Proc. § 425.16(b)(1).
                    YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                19


equitable remedies on its remaining two claims for false
designation of origin and cybersquatting.
    During a one-day bench trial, the district court
considered testimony and argument on four issues:
(1) whether Yuga was entitled to disgorgement of
Defendants’ profits, and, if so, in what amount; (2) the
amount of statutory damages to be awarded on the
cybersquatting claim; (3) the scope of a permanent
injunction; and (4) whether this was an “exceptional case”
warranting an award of attorneys’ fees. The district court
found that the BAYC Marks are unregistered trademarks and
that Yuga had used these marks “since approximately April
2021 in connection with advertising, marketing, and
promotion of its products and services nationwide and
internationally through multiple platforms, including the
BAYC website.” The district court awarded Yuga
disgorgement of Defendants’ profits, maximum ACPA
statutory damages, and attorneys’ fees, finding that this was
an exceptional case due to “the strength of Yuga’s litigating
position” and Defendant’s willful infringement, bad faith
intent to profit, and litigation conduct. The court also issued
a permanent injunction prohibiting Defendants “from
marketing, promoting, or selling products or services,
including RR/BAYC NFTs and Ape Market, that use the
BAYC Marks.”
    Defendants now appeal the district court’s grant of
summary judgment for Yuga on its false-designation-of-
origin and cybersquatting claims and on Defendants’ DMCA
counterclaim. Defendants also argue that the remedies
granted should be vacated under the First and Seventh
Amendments and federal equitable principles.
20                  YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


                       DISCUSSION
    We primarily focus on the district court’s summary-
judgment decision, which we review de novo. Idaho
Conservation League v. Poe, 86 F.4th 1243, 1246 (9th Cir.
2023). “Summary judgment is appropriate where ‘there is no
genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is
entitled to judgment as a matter of law.’” Id. (citing Fed. R.
Civ. P. 56(a)). “We ‘must determine whether, viewing the
evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party,
there are any genuine issues of material fact and whether the
district court correctly applied the relevant substantive
law.’” Id. (quoting Lopez v. Smith, 203 F.3d 1122, 1131 (9th
Cir. 2000) (en banc)).
           I. Trademark-Infringement Claim
     The Lanham Act “creates a comprehensive framework
for regulating the use of trademarks and protecting them
against infringement, dilution, and unfair competition.”
Punchbowl, Inc. v. AJ Press, LLC, 90 F.4th 1022, 1027 (9th
Cir. 2024) (quoting Gordon v. Drape Creative, Inc., 909
F.3d 257, 263 (9th Cir. 2018)). Section 43(a) prohibits a
person from using “in commerce any word, term, name,
symbol, or device . . . which . . . is likely to cause confusion
. . . as to the origin . . . of his or her goods.” 15 U.S.C.
§ 1125(a)(1). As the text suggests, a trademark-infringement
claim based on a false-designation-of-origin theory turns on
the plaintiff establishing a likelihood of consumer confusion
between its mark and the defendant’s allegedly infringing
mark. See OTR Wheel Eng’g, Inc. v. W. Worldwide Servs.,
Inc., 897 F.3d 1008, 1018 (9th Cir. 2018) (citing Two Pesos,
Inc. v. Taco Cabana, Inc., 505 U.S. 763, 780 (1992)).
   The statute’s reference to “origin” gives rise “to two
causes of action for ‘passing off’ based on false designation
                   YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                21


of origin: passing off and reverse passing off.” Id. at 1016.
“Passing off . . . occurs when a producer misrepresents his
own goods or services as someone else’s. ‘Reverse passing
off,’ as its name implies, is the opposite: The producer
misrepresents someone else’s goods or services as his own.”
Id. (alteration in original) (citation omitted). Here, Yuga
asserts a passing-off claim, arguing that Defendants “made
counterfeit BAYC NFTs that they advertised and sold to the
same customers, in the same markets, using Yuga’s BAYC
trademarks.”
    To prevail on any trademark-infringement claim, the
plaintiff must have a valid and enforceable trademark.
Defendants assert that Yuga does not have an enforceable
trademark because NFTs are not “goods” protected by the
Lanham Act and because, even if Yuga could have a valid
trademark, it is not entitled to enforce its trademark rights.
Defendants claim that any trademark rights are
unenforceable because Yuga’s sale of its NFTs was an
unlawful sale of unregistered securities, and because Yuga
no longer has an ownership interest in the BAYC Marks.
Thus, we must address these threshold issues before
reaching the merits of Yuga’s infringement claim and
Defendants’ infringement-related defenses.
      A. Are NFTs protected by the Lanham Act?
    Defendants argue that Yuga’s trademark claim fails
because an NFT is not a “good” under the Lanham Act. This
argument is not persuasive. Throughout its text, the Lanham
Act protects marks used with “any goods or services.” E.g.,
15 U.S.C. §§ 1114, 1125; see also id. § 1112. But the
Lanham Act does not define what constitutes a “good” or a
“service” that triggers trademark protection, nor does it
exclude certain categories of goods and services from its
22                 YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


protection. See id. § 1127. However, the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office (PTO) has concluded that NFTs are goods
covered by the Lanham Act. In one of its most recent reports
on NFTs, the PTO explained:

       Trademarks perform the same functions in
       NFT markets as they do in other markets:
       They identify the source of goods and
       services and distinguish the goods and
       services of one party from those of others.
       For example, trademarks can be used to
       indicate the source of underlying assets
       associated with NFTs, such as digital art,
       video clips of iconic sports moments, or
       physical shoes. Trademarks can also indicate
       the source of services, such as unique
       entertainment     experiences    or     club
       memberships, access to which is represented
       by NFTs.

U.S. Pat. & Trademark Off. and U.S. Copyright Off., Non-
Fungible Tokens and Intellectual Property: A Report to
Congress 45 (Mar. 2024) (footnotes omitted). Although not
binding, the PTO’s position is instructive given Congress’s
silence. See 15 U.S.C. § 1127; Loper Bright Enters. v.
Raimondo, 603 U.S. 369, 388 (2024) (citing Skidmore v.
Swift & Co., 323 U.S. 134, 139–40 (1944)).
    In arguing that NFTs are not trademarkable goods,
Defendants rely on Dastar Corp. v. Twentieth Century Fox
Film Corp., 539 U.S. 23 (2003), and Slep-Tone Ent. Corp. v.
Wired for Sound Karaoke and DJ Servs., LLC, 845 F.3d
1246 (9th Cir. 2017) (per curiam). These cases addressed
tangible goods that contained intangible, expressive content.
                    YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                 23


    At issue in Dastar was a video cassette. The Supreme
Court addressed whether section 43(a) of the Lanham Act,
which prohibits a person from using “in commerce any
word, term, name, symbol, or device . . . which . . . is likely
to cause confusion . . . as to the origin . . . of his or her
goods,” 15 U.S.C. § 1125(a), “prevents the unaccredited
copying of a work,” Dastar, 539 U.S. at 25. The Court first
analyzed the statutory phrase “origin . . . of . . . goods” and
understood “origin” to mean “the producer of the tangible
product sold in the marketplace.” Id. at 31. Applying this
definition, the Court concluded that the “origin” of a video
cassette is the manufacturer of the cassette, not the creator of
the footage within the cassette. Id. at 33–38. Because
copyright law already protects the communicative content in
the footage, the Court reasoned that also affording Lanham
Act protection to that content would render trademark law
superfluous. Id. at 33–35.
    Defendants understand Dastar to mean that intangible
goods, including NFTs, are ineligible for trademark
protection because they are not “goods.” But the Supreme
Court did not adopt a bright-line rule delineating tangible
and intangible goods. Rather, it recognized a distinction
between the tangible good and the intangible aspects of that
same good. In so doing, it concluded that “the author of any
idea, concept, or communication embodied in [tangible]
goods” is not afforded trademark protection separate and
distinct from the protection afforded to the producer of the
tangible cassette housing the author’s content. Id. at 37. Only
the tangible good operated as a source-identifier for the
overall product (video content and video cassette), as
experienced by a video-cassette-purchasing consumer. Id. at
31–33, 36–37.
24                  YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


    Slep-Tone involved a compact disc (CD) of karaoke
tracks. A karaoke operator obtained and used digital copies
of tracks originally published on CDs marketed under the
plaintiff’s mark, and the plaintiff sued for trademark
infringement. Slep-Tone, 845 F.3d at 1248. We held that the
plaintiff’s claim should have been grounded in copyright,
not trademark, because “[c]onsumers never [saw] the digital
files and [the karaoke operator] neither [sold] them nor
ma[d]e representations about their source medium.” Id. at
1250. That is, the karaoke operator “[did] not use the
[plaintiff’s] marks ‘in connection with the sale, offering for
sale, distribution, or advertising’ of the files.” Id. (citation
omitted). Thus, given how the karaoke operator used the
replicated tracks, there was no prospect of consumer
confusion about “the source of the tangible good sold in the
marketplace.” Id. (citation omitted).
    Defendants fall short of establishing that NFTs are
categorically excluded from protection under the Lanham
Act. The statutory text does not require this result. Nor does
the reasoning in Dastar or Slep-Tone. Unlike the intangible
content at issue in those cases, NFTs are not contained in or
even associated with tangible goods that are sold in the
marketplace. NFTs exist only in the digital world, and they
are associated only with digital files. NFTs are marketed and
actively traded in commerce. See Bobek, supra, at 653.
Indeed, consumers purchase NFTs as commercial goods in
online marketplaces specifically curated for NFTs. See id.
     Defendants also fail to grapple with Yuga’s specific
BAYC NFT product that customers are encountering
firsthand in the market. See U.S. Pat. & Trademark Off. v.
Booking.com B.V., 591 U.S. 549, 556 (2020) (recognizing
“the Lanham Act’s focus on consumer perception” and
holding that trademark registrability turns in part on the
                    YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                25


“meaning” of the trademark “to consumers”). Customers
experience the BAYC NFTs as more than a digital deed to
or authentication of artwork. BAYC NFTs also function as
membership passes, providing “Ape holders” with exclusive
access to online and offline social clubs, branded
merchandise, interactive digital spaces, and celebrity events.
    Thus, we conclude that Yuga’s NFTs are “goods” under
the Lanham Act.
     B. Does Yuga Have Enforceable Trademarks?
    “A party claiming trademark ownership must establish
that it was the first to use the mark in the sale of goods or
services. This concept is known as trademark ‘priority.’”
Hana Fin., Inc. v. Hana Bank, 735 F.3d 1158, 1160 (9th Cir.
2013). There is no dispute that Yuga was the first to use the
BAYC Marks in commerce. Rather, Defendants argue that
Yuga does not have trademark priority because it
(1) engaged in unlawful conduct in using the BAYC Marks
to sell unregistered securities and (2) gave up its trademark
rights when selling its NFTs.
                   1. Unlawful Conduct
    There is a limitation on the general rule that the first to
use a mark in commerce establishes trademark priority:
“only lawful use in commerce can give rise to trademark
priority.” CreAgri, Inc. v. USANA Health Scis., Inc., 474
F.3d 626, 630 (9th Cir. 2007). “This rule prevents the absurd
result of the government ‘extending the benefits of
trademark protection to a seller based upon actions the seller
took in violation of that government’s own laws.’” AK
Futures LLC v. Boyd St. Distro, LLC, 35 F.4th 682, 689 (9th
Cir. 2022) (quoting CreAgri, 474 F.3d at 630).
26                    YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


     There are two narrowing principles that apply to the
unlawful-use limitation. First, “unlawful conduct [does] not
preclude trademark protection if it was ‘immaterial,’ namely
if it was not ‘of such gravity and significance that the usage
[of the mark] . . . as a matter of law, [can] create no
trademark rights.’” S. Cal. Darts Ass’n v. Zaffina, 762 F.3d
921, 931 (9th Cir. 2014) (second, third, and fourth alterations
in original) (quoting CreAgri, 474 F.3d at 633). And second,
trademark protection may not be withheld if the unlawful
conduct is collateral to the use of the mark. Id.; see also AK
Futures, 35 F.4th at 689 (“[I]llegal activity of insufficient
gravity or connection to a mark’s use in commerce might not
defeat an otherwise valid trademark.”). There must be a
sufficient “nexus between the unlawful behavior and the use
of the mark in commerce.” S. Cal. Darts Ass’n, 762 F.3d at
931; see CreAgri, 474 F.3d at 631.
    Here, Defendants contend that “there is a genuine
dispute whether Yuga used [its] marks legally” because there
is “evidence showing that Yuga sold the Bored Apes NFTs
as unregistered securities.” Defendants point to Yuga’s
marketing of BAYC NFTs as “investment contracts”
coupled with its grant of cryptocurrency to NFT holders.
Putting aside the uncertain regulatory landscape of the
nascent NFT market, 7 we conclude that there is an

7
  See Alanna Sadler, Note and Comment, Legal Uncertainty in Virtual
Worlds and Digital Goods: Do the Same Laws Apply?, 32 U. Miami Bus.
L. Rev. 381, 400 (2024); see also Lauren Au, Note, Fractionalization to
Securitization: How the SEC May Regulate the Emerging Asset of NFTs,
96 S. Cal. L. Rev. 253, 255 (2022) (“[R]egulatory and securities laws
struggle to keep pace with emerging innovations and financial
technologies like NFTs. Much of the SEC’s limited guidance focuses on
cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology generally, with little
                      YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                      27


insufficient nexus between Yuga’s use of the BAYC Marks
and its purported securities violations to withhold trademark
protection.
    In Southern California Darts Ass’n, the defendant
asserted that the plaintiff could not enforce its business
marks through an infringement action because the plaintiff’s
corporate status was suspended for nonpayment of taxes.
762 F.3d at 931. We rejected this argument, concluding that
the plaintiff’s alleged failure to pay taxes was “unrelated to
the purpose of the federal trademark laws and, therefore,
collateral and immaterial.” Id. at 931–32. Conversely, in
CreAgri, we considered whether a company that had
misstated the amount of the active ingredient in its health
supplement in violation of federal drug-labeling laws could
claim trademark priority in the name of its product. 474 F.3d
at 630–31. In that context, we held that “the nexus between
a misbranded product and that product’s name, particularly
one designed for human consumption, is sufficiently close to
justify withholding trademark protection for that name until
and unless the misbranding is cured.” Id. at 631–32. That is,
there was a clear connection between the unlawful act—
mislabeling the ingredients in the supplement—and the use
of that product name (the mark) in commerce. Id. at 632.
    This case is more analogous to Southern California
Darts Ass’n than CreAgri. Like the plaintiff’s failure to pay
taxes in Southern California Darts Ass’n, Yuga’s failure to
register its NFTs as securities does not impact the source-
indicating or goods-describing functions of trademarks. But
these inherent trademark functions were at issue in the

guidance specifically on NFTs as a security.”). But see, e.g., Friel v.
Dapper Labs, Inc., 657 F. Supp. 3d 422, 433–34 (S.D.N.Y. 2023)
(applying the traditional investment-contract analysis to NFTs).
28                    YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


product-labeling violation addressed in CreAgri, where the
false representation of ingredients on the product label
directly related to the message that the product’s mark was
sending to the purchasing public. Thus, we conclude that
there is an insufficient nexus between Yuga’s alleged
securities violation and its use of the BAYC Marks in
commerce to warrant withholding trademark protection. 8
See S. Cal. Darts Ass’n, 762 F.3d at 931–32.
                          2. Ownership
   Defendants also argue that Yuga was not entitled to
summary judgment on trademark infringement because
Yuga no longer has any ownership rights in the BAYC
Marks. Defendants make three broad arguments attacking
Yuga’s ownership interest, none of which are meritorious.
                                  a.
    First, Defendants seemingly argue that Yuga assigned all
rights in its mark to NFT purchasers via the T&Cs governing
Yuga’s Bored Ape NFT sales. 9 They contend that because

8
  Defendants also reference Yuga’s failure to register the BAYC Marks
with the PTO in suggesting Yuga does not have an enforceable
trademark. But an otherwise valid “unregistered trademark can be
enforced against would-be infringers in several ways,” including through
an infringement action under § 43(a) of the Lanham Act, an ACPA
claim, and state common law. Matal v. Tam, 582 U.S. 218, 225–26
(2017).
9
 Defendants brief this argument as an abandonment issue. A mark is
“abandoned” (1) when the owner has “discontinued [its use] with intent
not to resume such use” or (2) when the owner’s conduct causes the mark
“to lose its significance as a mark.” 15 U.S.C. § 1127. Yuga has plainly
not discontinued its use of its trademarks, so any abandonment theory
necessarily fails the first prong. We address the second prong below. To
                      YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                      29


the T&Cs granted a sweeping license to use the associated
Bored Ape image with no carveout for trademark rights,
such rights must have completely passed to the NFT
purchasers. Of course, a trademark owner may assign its
rights. Russell Rd. Food & Beverage, LLC v. Spencer, 829
F.3d 1152, 1156 (9th Cir. 2016); see also 2 J. Thomas
McCarthy, McCarthy on Trademarks and Unfair
Competition §§ 18:4, 18:15 (5th ed. 2025). But for an
assignment to be valid, it must transfer the goodwill of the
business or the part of the business connected to the mark,
otherwise it is an “invalid assignment in gross.” E. & J.
Gallo Winery v. Gallo Cattle Co., 967 F.2d 1280, 1289 (9th
Cir. 1992); see also 2 McCarthy, supra, § 18:17. We rely on
general principles of contract law to determine whether a
valid assignment has occurred. 2 McCarthy, supra, § 18:4.
While assignment of a registered trademark must be done in
a signed writing, see 15 U.S.C. § 1060(a)(1), (3), assignment
of an unregistered trademark need not be in writing but must
only be proved by strong evidence, 2 McCarthy § 18:4.
    Here, Yuga’s T&Cs stated that buyers own the NFT and
“the underlying Bored Ape, the Art.” They also granted
buyers “a worldwide, royalty-free license to use, copy, and
display the purchased Art . . . for [the buyers’] own personal,
non-commercial use” and for “creating derivative works
based on the Art” for commercial use. Yuga undoubtedly
gave buyers control over the purchased NFT and an
unlimited, royalty-free right to use its associated artwork




the extent Defendants argue that Yuga sold its trademark rights via the
T&Cs, that argument sounds in assignment, and we address it
accordingly.
30                     YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


(i.e., the Bored Ape image). 10 But the BAYC Marks are
distinct from the artwork, and the T&Cs are silent as to
trademark rights.
    Defendants suggest that because the NFTs themselves
and some of the Bored Ape images incorporate one or more
of the BAYC marks, conveying the NFTs and artwork
necessarily also granted rights in Yuga’s trademarks. But
nothing suggests that the incorporated marks act as a source
identifier relative to each individual purchaser or to all Ape
holders such that the purchasers constantly infringe one
another’s marks. Additionally, the transactions do not
establish that Yuga assigned the goodwill associated with its
trademarks to the NFT purchasers. Yuga has continued to
use the BAYC Marks to market BAYC.
    Defendants also cite a statement from Yuga’s CEO made
during the litigation that Yuga granted “all IP rights” to the
NFT purchasers and that Yuga retained “none of them.” But
this statement is not determinative given that our task in
discerning the terms of a written contract is to construe the
words of the contract, not after-the-fact statements about its
contents. See Miller v. Glenn Miller Prods., Inc., 454 F.3d
975, 989 (9th Cir. 2006) (per curiam) (“[T]he fundamental
goal of contract interpretation is to give effect to the mutual
intent of the parties as it existed at the time of contracting.”
(alteration in original) (citation omitted)). As detailed above,
the T&Cs unambiguously do not assign trademark rights in



10
   By referencing “derivative works,” the T&Cs plainly meant to convey
a copyright license, given that term is a term of art under the Copyright
Act. See 17 U.S.C. § 101 (“A ‘derivative work’ is a work based upon one
or more preexisting works . . . [and includes] any other form in which a
work may be recast, transformed, or adapted.”).
                   YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS               31


Yuga’s marks. And Yuga did not have to expressly carve out
a grant of trademark rights to avoid conveying them.
    Relatedly, Defendants claim that Yuga assigned three of
its marks by transferring an NFT associated with a different
image—a “one of one” ApeCoin image displaying an ape
skull. The ApeCoin image is not itself a BAYC Mark, so
Yuga did not convey any of its trademark rights in gifting
this image.
                             b.
    Next, Defendants argue that Yuga abandoned its
trademarks by “fail[ing] to exercise adequate quality
control” over them. Barcamerica Int’l USA Tr. v. Tyfield
Imps., Inc., 289 F.3d 589, 596 (9th Cir. 2002). This
contention also stems from Defendants’ sweeping view of
Yuga’s T&Cs and is essentially a naked-licensing argument.
“‘Naked licensing’ occurs when the licensor ‘fails to
exercise adequate quality control over the licensee’” and,
accordingly, abandons “any rights to the trademark.”
FreecycleSunnyvale v. Freecycle Network, 626 F.3d 509,
515–16 (9th Cir. 2010) (quoting Barcamerica, 289 F.3d at
596, 598). The naked-licensing rule applies only when a
trademark license has been granted. Sweetheart Plastics, Inc.
v. Detroit Forming, Inc., 743 F.2d 1039, 1047 (4th Cir.
1984); Neo4j, Inc. v. PureThink, LLC, 480 F. Supp. 3d 1071,
1077 (N.D. Cal. 2020).
    Defendants’ abandonment argument fails right out of the
gate because we have concluded that Yuga did not grant any
trademark license. As discussed, nothing in the T&Cs
references Yuga’s trademarks. And although a trademark
license may be implied, see Dep’t of Parks & Recreation v.
Bazaar Del Mundo Inc., 448 F.3d 1118, 1129 (9th Cir.
2006), Defendants fail to point to any evidence that the
32                  YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


parties to the T&Cs believed that NFT purchasers obtained
a license to use Yuga’s trademarks. We cannot infer the
existence of a licensing agreement from the grant of other
rights without something more. Cf. id. at 1130 (holding that
contract to lease premises was not a licensing agreement
where “[n]one of the terms typical of a trademark licensing
agreement, such as payment of royalties, [were] present” and
the terms of the contract were lease provisions); Univ. of Ala.
Bd. of Trs. v. New Life Art, Inc., 683 F.3d 1266, 1273–75
(11th Cir. 2012) (holding that a licensing agreement
authorizing use of University trademarks did not cover
paintings depicting University uniforms).
                               c.
    Finally, Defendants assert that Yuga failed to adequately
police “unlicensed, commercial uses of the asserted marks.”
A mark may become unenforceable “as a result of a
trademark owner’s failure to police the mark, resulting in
widespread usage by competitors leading to a perception of
genericness among the public.’” Freecycle Network, Inc. v.
Oey, 505 F.3d 898, 905 (9th Cir. 2007) (citation omitted).
Defendants cite a few examples of copycats using the BAYC
Marks. This is insufficient to create a question of fact
regarding whether the marks have “ceas[ed] to function as a
symbol of quality and a controlled source,”
FreecycleSunnyvale, 626 F.3d at 515, particularly given
BAYC’s ongoing recognition as an online brand that
actively hosts events for its members, curates online and
offline social communities, and works with celebrity
endorsers and major fashion brands. Nor do Defendants
address the evidence that Yuga did police its marks by
sending takedown notices for unlicensed uses of its
trademarks to NFT marketplaces. See Freecycle Network,
505 F.3d at 905. In sum, Defendants have not shown there is
                        YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                         33


a triable issue regarding whether Yuga retained ownership
of the BAYC Marks.
             C. Has Yuga Proven Infringement?
    To prevail on its trademark-infringement claim, Yuga
must show a likelihood of consumer confusion between the
Defendants’ allegedly infringing marks and Yuga’s marks.
OTR Wheel, 897 F.3d at 1018. Yuga’s “passing off” claim
relies on “forward confusion.” Ironhawk Techs., Inc. v.
Dropbox, Inc., 2 F.4th 1150, 1159–60 (9th Cir. 2021)
(citation omitted). “Forward confusion occurs when
consumers believe that goods bearing the [allegedly
infringing mark] came from, or were sponsored by, the
[original] mark holder.” 11 Id. at 1159–60 (citation omitted).
Defendants contend that they cannot be held liable for
infringement because their use of Yuga’s marks constituted
nominative fair use and was “expressive work” protected by
the First Amendment.
    Under our “likelihood-of-confusion test,” we “ask
‘whether a “reasonably prudent consumer” in the
marketplace is likely to be confused as to the origin of the
good or service bearing one of the marks.’” Punchbowl, 90
F.4th at 1027 (quoting Dreamwerks Prod. Grp. v. SKG
Studio, 142 F.3d 1127, 1129 (9th Cir. 1998)); see also
Rearden LLC v. Rearden Com., Inc., 683 F.3d 1190, 1209
(9th Cir. 2012). Typically, this requires us to evaluate the
Sleekcraft factors. Punchbowl, 90 F.4th at 1027 (citing AMF
Inc. v. Sleekcraft Boats, 599 F.2d 341 (9th Cir. 1979)). But
there is no need to reach this inquiry if the defendant’s use

11
   We also recognize “reverse confusion,” which “occurs when
consumers dealing with the [original] mark holder believe that they are
doing business with the [allegedly infringing party].” Id. at 1160 (citation
omitted).
34                 YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


of the protected mark constitutes nominative fair use or is
protected by the First Amendment. See Toyota Motor Sales,
U.S.A., Inc. v. Tabari, 610 F.3d 1171, 1182 (9th Cir. 2010)
(stating that when nominative fair use is raised, the court
“must eschew application of Sleekcraft and analyze the case
solely under the rubric of nominative fair use”); Green v.
Miss U.S. of Am., LLC, 52 F.4th 773, 801 (9th Cir. 2022)
(stating that when a defendant “makes the ‘threshold legal
showing’ that the supposed trademark infringement is
protected by the First Amendment, it eliminates the need to
reach the fact-bound consumer confusion issue at all”).
Thus, we begin our analysis with those issues.
                 1. Nominative Fair Use
    “Nominative fair use applies ‘where a defendant has
used the plaintiff’s mark to describe the plaintiff’s
product . . . .’” Fortune Dynamic, Inc. v. Victoria’s Secret
Stores Brand Mgmt., Inc., 618 F.3d 1025, 1031 (9th Cir.
2010) (quoting Cairns v. Franklin Mint Co., 292 F.3d 1139,
1151 (9th Cir. 2002)). A common example is where one
“deliberately uses another’s trademark or trade dress for the
purposes of comparison, criticism, or point of reference.”
E.S.S. Ent. 2000, Inc. v. Rock Star Videos, Inc., 547 F.3d
1095, 1098 (9th Cir. 2008) (citation modified). Another
example is where one sells “genuine goods bearing a true
mark even though such sale is without the mark owner’s
consent.” Adobe Sys. Inc. v. Christenson, 809 F.3d 1071,
1081 (9th Cir. 2015) (citation omitted). In that context there
may be copyright infringement or other violations, but there
is not a trademark infringement. See id. at 1081–82. Where
a mark is “the only word reasonably available to describe a
particular thing,” use of that mark “lies outside . . . of
trademark law.” Applied Underwriters, Inc. v. Lichtenegger,
913 F.3d 884, 893 (9th Cir. 2019) (quoting New Kids on the
                      YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                     35


Block v. News Am. Publ’g, Inc., 971 F.2d 302, 308 (9th Cir.
1992)).
    Nominative fair use does not implicate the source-
identification function of trademark. Id. By definition, if the
defendant uses the plaintiff’s mark to refer to the plaintiff’s
product, the source is correctly identified. To determine
whether a particular use qualifies as nominative fair use, we
consider the New Kids factors: 12

        First, the product or service in question must
        be one not readily identifiable without use of
        the trademark; second, only so much of the
        mark or marks may be used as is reasonably
        necessary to identify the product or service;
        and third, the user must do nothing that
        would, in conjunction with the mark, suggest
        sponsorship or endorsement by the trademark
        holder.

971 F.2d at 308 (footnote omitted). These factors are
“designed to address the risk that nominative use of the mark
will inspire a mistaken belief on the part of consumers that
the speaker is sponsored or endorsed by the trademark
holder.” Toyota Motor Sales, 610 F.3d at 1176. If all three
New Kids factors are satisfied, there is no infringement. Id.
If all the factors are not satisfied, the court “may order
defendants to modify their use of the mark so that all three
factors are satisfied.” Id. Nominative fair use is not an
affirmative defense in the traditional sense. The defendant
“need only show that it used the mark to refer to the

12
  We have also referred to these as the Toyota factors in reference to
Toyota Motor Sales, 610 F.3d 1171, which reaffirmed the New Kids’
nominative fair-use standard. See, e.g., Adobe Sys, 809 F.3d at 1081.
36                 YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


trademarked good.” Id. at 1183. If that showing is made, the
burden then “reverts to the plaintiff to show a likelihood of
confusion.” Id.
    Here, Defendants cannot make the required initial
showing because they did not use the BAYC Marks merely
to describe or otherwise reference Yuga’s NFTs. They used
the marks as marks. Jack Daniel’s Props., Inc. v. VIP Prods.
LLC, 599 U.S. 140, 148 (2023). If Ripps had solely depicted
the BAYC Marks in the context of critiquing the Bored Ape
images as racist, that may have been nominative fair use. See
E.S.S. Ent. 2000, 547 F.3d at 1098–99. But Defendants went
well beyond criticism: they used the BAYC Marks to create,
promote, and sell their own NFTs associated with the same
artwork as Yuga’s NFT collection.
     Defendants embedded the “Bored Ape Yacht Club” and
“BAYC” marks into their RR/BAYC NFTs by using them
for their NFT collection name and symbol. By design, these
name and symbol designations signify the provenance of an
NFT. Ripps also used these and other BAYC marks on social
media in advertising the RR/BAYC NFT collection. It does
not matter that Defendants’ ultimate goal may have been
criticism and commentary. See Jack Daniel’s, 599 U.S. at
148 (explaining a defendant does not get the benefit of fair
use “even if engaging in parody, criticism, or commentary—
when using the similar-looking mark ‘as a designation of
source for the [defendant’s] own goods’” (alteration in
original) (citation omitted)).
    Yuga used the “Bored Ape Yacht Club” and “BAYC”
marks in the same source-identifying way for its BAYC NFT
collection. And there is evidence that the duplicative use of
these marks as identifiers for both NFT collections has
caused third-party NFT trackers, like Etherscan, to identify
                    YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                37


BAYC NFTs and RR/BAYC NFTs as having the same
origin. See Adobe Sys., 809 F.3d at 1081 (“In a nominative
fair use case, the concern is avoiding confusion over whether
the speaker is endorsed or sponsored by the trademark
holder.”).
     Defendants nonetheless argue that they engaged in
nominative fair-use because this doctrine applies even when
a defendant’s “ultimate goal” is to describe its own products.
In making this argument, Defendants rely on Cairns, where
we stated: “The nominative fair use analysis is appropriate
where a defendant has used the plaintiff’s mark to describe
the plaintiff’s product, even if the defendant’s ultimate goal
is to describe his own product.” 292 F.3d at 1151. Contrary
to Defendants’ suggestion, Cairns does not stand for the
principle that using someone else’s mark on the same type
of product as the mark holder’s qualifies as nominative fair
use.
    The cases on which Cairns relies demonstrate that
nominative fair use occurs when a mark is used with the
ultimate goal of: (1) describing a product or service that is
necessarily different from the mark holder’s product, or
(2) comparing a product to the mark holder’s product. See
id. at 1151–54. In New Kids, two newspapers used the
trademarked band name “The New Kids on the Block” to
present polls to their readers about the band. 971 F.2d at 304.
In Volkswagenwerk Aktiengesellschaft v. Church, an auto-
repair business specializing in Volkswagen and Porsche, had
a sign reading, “Modern Volkswagen Porsche Service.” 411
F.2d 350, 351 (9th Cir. 1969). The Volkswagen car company
uses the “Volkswagen” mark to describe its cars, and it
argued that the sign was infringing. Id. Similarly, in WCVB–
TV v. Boston Athletic Ass’n, a television station made
unauthorized broadcasts of—and referred by name to—the
38                 YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


“Boston Marathon,” a trademarked sports event. 926 F.2d
42, 44 (1st Cir. 1991). And in Smith v. Chanel, Inc., an
imitator of brand perfumes advertised his “Second Chance”
perfume as indistinguishable from the trademarked “Chanel
No. 5” perfume. 402 F.2d 562, 562–63 (9th Cir. 1968).
    In all these cases, the defendants’ use of the plaintiffs’
marks was permissible because it referenced or described the
plaintiffs’ products and did not create confusion about the
origin of the defendants’ products. In New Kids, the court
explained that the newspapers had no choice but to refer to
the name of the band that was the subject of their poll, and
trademark protection “does not extend to rendering
newspaper articles, conversations, polls and comparative
advertising impossible.” 971 F.2d at 308. In
Volkswagenwerk, the court concluded that the auto-repair
business was sufficiently distinguished from the car
company, noting the repair business’s “prominent use of the
word ‘Independent’ whenever the terms ‘Volkswagen’ or
‘VW’ appeared in [its] advertising.” 411 F.2d at 352. In
WCVB–TV, the court explained that a news broadcast
advertising the “Boston Marathon” did not create confusion
because “a viewer who sees those words flash upon the
screen will believe simply that Channel 5 will show, or is
showing, or has shown, the marathon, not that Channel 5 has
some special approval from the [plaintiff] to do so.” 926 F.2d
at 46. And in Smith, the court determined that an imitator
must be able to compare to the original product being
imitated, that the imitators’ “advertisement ma[de] it clear
that the product they offer is their own,” and that the
imitators used the plaintiff’s mark “only to describe
[plaintiff]’s product, not to identify their own.” 402 F.2d at
568–69.
                        YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                         39


    These cases are distinguishable from the present case. As
explained, Defendants did not use the BAYC Marks merely
to reference Yuga’s NFTs. They incorporated some of the
marks into their own NFTs and used others in marketing
their NFTs, thereby “implicat[ing] the source-identification
function that is the purpose of trademark.” Applied
Underwriters, 913 F.3d at 893 (quoting New Kids, 971 F.2d
at 308). Defendants used Yuga’s marks not just as
descriptors or comparators, but to “capitalize on consumer
confusion [and] appropriate the cachet of” BAYC NFTs to
sell their own product. New Kids, 971 F.2d at 308. There are
significant questions about whether the likelihood-of-
consumer-confusion requirement was satisfied given the
nature of Defendants’ project to use “satire and
appropriation to protest and educate regarding The Bored
Ape Yacht Club and the framework of NFTs,” but those
questions are properly addressed in analyzing the Sleekcraft
factors, not nominative fair use. 13 See Jack Daniel’s, 599
U.S. at 153 (holding that the defendant’s “parody” message
“matters in assessing confusion because consumers are not
so likely to think that the maker of a mocked product is itself
doing the mocking”).
                       2. First Amendment
    We recognize a narrow First Amendment exception to
trademark infringement for expressive speech. See id. at
153–56. Where a defendant “make[s] a threshold legal
showing that its allegedly infringing use is part of an
expressive work protected by the First Amendment,” the
plaintiff must satisfy the Rogers test to prove infringement.

13
   We do not address Defendants’ argument that the district court
incorrectly allocated the burden of proof in its analysis of nominative fair
use because any error is ultimately harmless.
40                 YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


Gordon, 909 F.3d at 264 (citing Rogers v. Grimaldi, 875
F.2d 994 (2d Cir. 1989)); accord Punchbowl, 90 F.4th at
1028. However, the Rogers test is a “cabined doctrine.” Jack
Daniel’s, 599 U.S. at 155. The Supreme Court has made
clear that this First Amendment exception to trademark
enforcement does not apply where “an alleged infringer uses
a trademark in the way the Lanham Act most cares about: as
a designation of source for the infringer’s own goods.” Id. at
153; see also id. at 144, 162 (concluding use of the phrases
“Bad Spaniels” and “The Old No. 2 On Your Tennessee
Carpet” on a dog toy to parody the Jack Daniel’s whiskey
brand was not protected use).
    Here, Defendants argue their “sale of the RR/BAYC
NFTs was a component of a broader expressive art project
and public protest” and, as such, the Rogers test applies.
They devote significant briefing to explaining the
“expressive nature” of their RR/BAYC NFT “project,” and
relatively little to explaining how their use of Yuga’s marks
was not a designation of source for their own NFTs. And
ultimately, Defendants’ cursory assertion that it did not use
Yuga’s marks as identifiers of source fails under Jack
Daniel’s.
    Quoting Jack Daniel’s, Defendants first state that
cabining Rogers is appropriate where “the defendant may be
‘trading on the good will of the trademark owner to market
its own goods.’” See 599 U.S. at 156. They then argue the
evidence here shows “the opposite—their constant criticism
and public protest of the Bored Ape Images’ racism and the
business practices associated with the Bored Ape NFT
collection was intended to undermine Yuga’s good will, not
to trade on it.” Defendants erroneously read an intent
requirement into the Court’s general explanation of how
marks are used as source identifiers. Whether images, logos,
                    YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                41


or phrases operate as source identifiers (i.e., marks) does not
depend on the subjective intent of the user. Under the
Lanham Act, “source identifiers [are] things that function to
‘indicate the source’ of goods, and so to ‘distinguish’ them
from ones ‘manufactured or sold by others.’” Id. at 156–57
(quoting 15 U.S.C. § 1127). The functionality of the mark
itself—how it operates and whether it is “likely to cause
confusion, or to cause mistake, or to deceive”—is what the
Lanham Act addresses. 15 U.S.C. §§ 1114(1)(a),
1125(a)(1)(A).
    Here, as explained above, Defendants used Yuga’s
marks as source identification for their RR/BAYC NFTs.
And when a use of the plaintiff’s mark is “at least in part for
source identification,” the First Amendment exception to
trademark enforcement is foreclosed. Jack Daniel’s, 599 U.S
at 156 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted); see
also id. at 159 (“The trademark law generally prevails over
the First Amendment when another’s trademark (or a
confusingly similar mark) is used without permission as a
means of source identification.” (citation modified)).
               3. Likelihood of Confusion
    Having determined that Defendants’ use of the BAYC
Marks is not excused by the nominative fair-use doctrine or
the First Amendment, we turn to the merits of Yuga’s
infringement claim and analyze “whether a ‘reasonably
prudent consumer’ in the marketplace is likely to be
confused as to the origin of” Defendants’ NFTs. Punchbowl,
90 F.4th at 1027 (quoting Dreamwerks, 142 F.3d at 1129);
see also Rearden, 683 F.3d at 1209. In doing so, we consider
“the eight ‘Sleekcraft’ factors: ‘(1) strength of the mark;
(2) proximity of the goods; (3) similarity of the marks;
(4) evidence of actual confusion; (5) marketing channels
42                  YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


used; (6) type of goods and the degree of care likely to be
exercised by the purchaser; (7) defendant’s intent in
selecting the mark; and (8) likelihood of expansion of the
product lines.’” Punchbowl, 90 F.4th at 1027 (quoting
Sleekcraft Boats, 599 F.2d at 348–49).
    These “factors (1) are non-exhaustive, and (2) should be
applied flexibly, particularly in the context of Internet
commerce.” Network Automation, Inc. v. Advanced Sys.
Concepts, Inc., 638 F.3d 1137, 1149 (9th Cir. 2011)
(emphasis added). And for internet commerce, “the three
most important Sleekcraft factors are (1) the similarity of the
marks, (2) the relatedness of the goods or services, and
(3) the simultaneous use of the Web as a marketing
channel.” GoTo.com, Inc. v. Walt Disney Co., 202 F.3d
1199, 1205 (9th Cir. 2000) (internal quotation marks and
citation omitted).
    While this is an inherently fact-specific inquiry, in the
appropriate case the likelihood of confusion may be decided
at summary judgment. See Multi Time Mach., Inc. v.
Amazon.com, Inc., 804 F.3d 930, 939 (9th Cir. 2015) (“The
likelihood of confusion is often a question of fact, but not
always.”); see also Jockey Club, Inc. v. Jockey Club of Las
Vegas, Inc., 595 F.2d 1167, 1168 (9th Cir. 1979) (“The
question of likelihood of confusion can be one of fact or
law.”). This is not an appropriate case. See JL Beverage Co.,
LLC v. Jim Beam Brands Co., 828 F.3d 1098, 1105 (9th Cir.
2016) (“While the district court must apply the correct
[summary judgment] standard in any case, the necessity to
do so is heightened in cases turning on the likelihood of
consumer confusion.”); Rearden, 683 F.3d at 1210 (“Given
the open-ended nature of this multi-prong inquiry, it is not
surprising that summary judgment on ‘likelihood of
confusion’ grounds is generally disfavored.”); Au-Tomotive
                       YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                       43


Gold, Inc. v. Volkswagen of Am., Inc., 457 F.3d 1062, 1075
(9th Cir. 2006) (“Because the likelihood of confusion is
often a fact-intensive inquiry, courts are generally reluctant
to decide this issue at the summary judgment stage.”).
     Despite our instruction to exercise caution in this context
because a “careful assessment of the pertinent factors that go
into determining likelihood of confusion usually requires a
full record,” Thane Int’l, Inc. v. Trek Bicycle Corp., 305 F.3d
894, 901–02 (9th Cir. 2002), the district court “easily
conclude[d] that Defendants’ use of Yuga’s BAYC Marks
was likely to cause confusion” and granted summary
judgment. This was error. 14 We review each Sleekcraft
factor in turn.
                      Strength of the Mark
    The first factor is the “strength of the [plaintiff’s] mark.”
Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 348. The strength of a mark
determines the level of protection the Lanham Act affords.
“The more likely a mark is to be remembered and associated
in the public mind with the mark’s owner, the greater
protection the mark is accorded by trademark laws.”
GoTo.com, 202 F.3d at 1207.
    A mark’s strength encompasses both conceptual and
commercial strength. See id. “[C]onceptual strength depends
largely on the obviousness of its connection to the good or
service to which it refers,” and it is classified along an
imperfect spectrum of distinctiveness: “generic, descriptive,


14
   Concerns about resolving a case on an incomplete record are
particularly salient in the NFT context. See U.S. Pat. & Trademark Off.
and U.S. Copyright Off., supra, at 53 (noting that “the absence of clear,
controlling judicial precedent deepens the uncertainty as to how
likelihood of confusion analyses will be undertaken in the NFT space”).
44                  YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


suggestive, arbitrary, and fanciful.” Fortune Dynamic, 618
F.3d at 1032–33. At bottom, “[t]he less obvious the
connection, the stronger the mark, and vice versa.” Id. at
1033. For example, descriptive marks are just that—they
“describe[] the qualities or characteristics of a good or
service.” Id. (alteration in original). Arbitrary and fanciful
marks have “no connection to the product” or are “made-up
words with no discernable meaning.” Id. The latter marks are
much stronger than the former. But applying these concepts
“is necessarily an imperfect science.” Id. Commercial
strength considers “actual marketplace recognition.” Id. at
1034 (citation omitted); Network Automation, 638 F.3d at
1149.
    The BAYC Marks are all conceptually strong. Far from
describing an NFT, they are arbitrary, if not entirely fanciful.
There is no obvious conceptual link between NFTs and
Apes, Bored Apes, or Yacht Clubs. Combining these terms
creates a conceptually strong mark based on
anthropomorphized apes. While the Ape Skull logo may not
be fanciful, it is arbitrary because there is no conceptual link
between ape skulls and NFTs. See Lodestar Anstalt v.
Bacardi & Co. Ltd., 31 F.4th 1228, 1259 (9th Cir. 2022)
(“An arbitrary mark . . . uses common words in a fictitious
and arbitrary manner to create a distinctive mark which
identifies the source of the product. Because such a mark
neither describes nor suggests anything about the nature of
the goods, the trademark holder must work hard to make
consumers associate the trademark with the product.”
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted)).
    Similarly, the BAYC marks are commercially strong.
Yuga has used the BAYC Marks for years to promote its
website, events, and products, including its BAYC NFT
collection. The marks have been featured in the press and
                    YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                45


popularized by celebrities, leading to brand merchandising
and collaborations with companies like Adidas. Given both
the conceptual strength and commercial strength of the
BAYC marks, even drawing reasonable inferences in
Defendants’ favor, the first Sleekcraft factor favors a finding
of likely confusion.
                  Proximity of the Goods
    Second, we consider the “proximity of the goods.”
Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 348. That is, how similar or related
Defendant’s goods are to Yuga’s goods. See Brookfield
Commc’ns, Inc. v. W. Coast Ent. Corp., 174 F.3d 1036, 1055
(9th Cir. 1999) (“Related goods are generally more likely
than unrelated goods to confuse the public as to the
producers of the goods.”). Both parties sell NFTs. But given
the complexity, idiosyncrasies, and nascence of NFTs, it
would be reductive to suggest that all NFTs are the same and
be done. See Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Non-
Fungible Tokens, U.S. Dep’t of Treasury 1 (May 2024)
(“There is no widely agreed upon definition of an NFT given
the diverse range of NFT types, uses, and designs.”). As
discussed at the outset, “NFTs can tokenize anything, such
as digital art, avatars, video game wearables, digital fashion
accessories, and music.” Bobek, supra, at 651. Because
NFTs are essentially comprised of both the software code
that tokenizes or turns a good into a distinctive asset and the
associated good itself, consumers perceive and interact with
different NFTs in different ways. See id. at 651–52. That is
why the precise design and functionality of the parties’
actual products matter.
    But the complexity and elasticity of NFTs does not
reduce the proximity of the RR/BAYC and BAYC NFTs,
particularly where they are linked—at Defendants’ design—
46                  YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


to the exact same Bored Ape images and corresponding Ape
ID numbers. In that sense, the two products are nearly
identical. There are, of course, differences in the underlying
code of each NFT because NFTs are inherently “one-of-a-
kind.” Id. at 651. But there is also evidence suggesting that
Defendants’ choice to copy Yuga’s contract name and
symbol for their RR/BAYC NFT collection has caused
actors in the NFT market to misidentify RR/BAYC NFTs as
BAYC NFTs despite the differences in the embedded code.
Thus, a reasonable factfinder could also conclude that this
factor favors Yuga’s claim of infringement.
                  Similarity of the Marks
    Third, we consider the “similarity of the marks.”
Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 348. This factor is “critical” to any
likelihood-of-confusion analysis because “[o]bviously, the
greater the similarity between the two marks at issue, the
greater the likelihood of confusion.” GoTo.com, 202 F.3d at
1205–06. And for internet-based goods in particular, mark
similarity is one of the “most important” factors. Id. at 1205.
“[T]hree axioms . . . apply to the ‘similarity’ analysis:
1) Marks should be considered in their entirety and as they
appear in the marketplace; 2) Similarity is best adjudged by
appearance, sound, and meaning; and, 3) Similarities weigh
more heavily than differences.” Entrepreneur Media, Inc. v.
Smith, 279 F.3d 1135, 1144 (9th Cir. 2002); see also
Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 351 (“Similarity of the marks is tested
on three levels: sight, sound, and meaning. Each must be
considered as they are encountered in the marketplace.”
(citations omitted)).
   The district court analyzed only the similarity of
Defendants’ rrbayc.com and apemarket.com domains to
Yuga’s bayc.com domain in the context of Yuga’s
                   YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                47


cybersquatting claim. The district court stated the legal
standard, reiterated its conclusion that “Defendants have
used Yuga’s marks” and admitted as much, and then
concluded “the third Sleekcraft factor weighs in favor of
Yuga.” Suffice to say, the analysis was incomplete and
conclusory.
    Because “[m]arks should be considered in their entirety
and as they appear in the marketplace,” Entrepreneur Media,
279 F.3d at 1144, it is necessary to examine the degree of
Defendants’ multi-layered use of Yuga’s marks as they were
displayed in the digital world. Defendants used Yuga’s
marks in various contexts, both with and without satirical
alteration. While Defendants embedded Yuga’s marks into
their own NFTs, it appears that they sold most of their NFTs
from rrbayc.com. That website expressly referred to their
NFT collection as RR/BAYC.
    With that context in mind, RR/BAYC shares obvious
similarities with the BAYC Mark: they both contain the
BAYC acronym, and the letters “BAYC” stand for “Bored
Ape Yacht Club” in both marks. These similarities are
arguably amplified by the marks’ arbitrary or fanciful nature.
See Pom Wonderful LLC v. Hubbard, 775 F.3d 1118, 1130
(9th Cir. 2014) (“[B]ecause a lesser degree of similarity is
required when a trademark holder’s mark is strong, the
commercial strength of the [plaintiff’s] mark amplifies the
significance of the marks’ . . . similarities.”).
   Of course, there are also differences between
Defendants’ and Yuga’s marks—namely, the “RR/” in
RR/BAYC, which refers to Ripps’s name. In Entrepreneur
Media, we held that a reasonable juror could find the words
“Entrepreneur” and “EntrepreneurPR” dissimilar when used
as business names. Id. at 1145–46. We came to this
48                  YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


conclusion even after acknowledging that, “[a]t first glance,
the difference between the two words . . . may seem slight.”
Id. at 1145; cf. Brookfield, 174 F.3d at 1055 (holding that,
for a preliminary injunction, the trademark “MovieBuff” and
the domain name “moviebuff.com” “are, for all intents and
purposes, identical in terms of sight, sound, and meaning”).
    Yuga argues that Entrepreneur Media is inapposite
because the “entrepreneur” mark is descriptive and the
generic “PR” suffix “did not suggest affiliation with any
mark holder,” whereas Yuga’s mark is “strong and
arbitrary.” Yuga is only partially correct. While we
separately discussed the genericity of “Entrepreneur,” we
noted that the addition of “PR” “is not arbitrary but suggests
a particular difference in meaning: ‘EntrepreneurPR,’
presumably meaning ‘public relations for (or by) a small,
independent business owner,’ has a connotation different
from ‘entrepreneur,’ standing alone.” Entrepreneur Media,
279 F.3d at 1146. In contrast, the “RR” prefix added to
BAYC is not a commonly known acronym like “PR” and
does not otherwise refer to something that has a widely
known, discernible meaning. Rather, it refers to Defendant
Ryder Ripps’s name, thus pointing to the origin and source
of the RR/BAYC NFTs.
    Moreover, in Entrepreneur Media, we relied on more
than just the meaning of PR in determining dissimilarity. We
explained that “Entrepreneur” and “EntrepreneurPR” “are
quite dissimilar when sounded out: The letters ‘PR’
constitute two additional syllables. Even silent readers
usually ‘hear’ words as they read and are likely to notice
syllabic differences.” Id. (citation omitted). Like the addition
of the two-syllable “PR” suffix in Entrepreneur Media, the
addition of “RR” and the slash mark makes the “RR/BAYC”
sound different than “BAYC.” The “RR” adds additional
                    YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                49


sounds, and the slash mark, while not present in all relevant
contexts (e.g., rrbayc.com), forces a pause when reading the
word out loud. And even crediting Yuga’s dubious
assumption that Entrepreneur Media relied in part on the
genericity of “Entrepreneur” in holding it was dissimilar
from “EntrepreneurPR,” that does not necessarily mean that
the inverse is always true—that an acronym affixed to a
strong mark is similar.
    Despite the similarities between the marks at issue, the
differences discussed above are sufficient for a reasonable
juror to conclude that these marks are not similar. See id. at
1145–46. For these reasons, the current record does not
clearly signal on which side of the ledger this highly critical
factor lands.
                     Actual Confusion
    The fourth factor is whether there is “evidence of actual
confusion.” Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 348. “[A]ctual confusion
is not necessary to a finding of likelihood of confusion under
the Lanham Act. Indeed, [p]roving actual confusion is
difficult . . . and the courts have often discounted such
evidence because it was unclear or insubstantial.” Network
Automation, 638 F.3d at 1151 (second alteration in original)
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Here, the
district court did not analyze this factor, concluding simply
that it was neutral.
    Yuga provided evidence of actual confusion, including
consumer-survey evidence and examples of NFT market
actors and television hosts confusing the two brands. But
other evidence suggests that those interested in the Bored
Apes knew that BAYC and RR/BAYC were different.
Considering the fully online nature of the NFT collections
and how atomized and widely scattered internet users are, a
50                  YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


reasonable juror might conclude that Yuga’s evidence of
actual confusion is “unpersuasive as to the ultimate issue of
likelihood of confusion.” Entrepreneur Media, 279 F.3d at
1150. Again, Yuga bears the burden of proof, and taking all
reasonable inferences in favor of Defendants, as the
nonmovants, we agree with the district court that this factor
is neutral on the existing record.
                   Marketing Channels
    Next, we consider the “marketing channels used” for the
parties’ products. Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 348. “Convergent
marketing channels increase the likelihood of confusion.” Id.
at 353. This factor is also important in the internet context.
GoTo.com, 202 F.3d at 1205. “When examining the
marketing channels used by . . . competing companies, we
consider where the goods or services are sold, the sales and
marketing methods employed, and the class of purchasers
exposed to the [companies’] marketing efforts.” La Quinta
Worldwide LLC v. Q.R.T.M., S.A. de C.V., 762 F.3d 867,
876–77 (9th Cir. 2014).
    The district court concluded this factor favors Yuga
because both parties “promoted and sold their NFTs through
the same online NFT marketplaces – OpenSea and x2y2 [and
also] used Twitter to promote their respective NFT
collections.” This is an oversimplification. The district court
ignored evidence showing that most of Defendants’ sales of
the RR/BAYC NFTs occurred on rrybayc.com, which is a
different marketing channel than bayc.com, where Yuga
marketed and sold its NFTs, regardless of their similarities
in form. Thus, a jury could reasonably conclude that
Defendants primarily generated their revenue using a non-
convergent market channel.
                   YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                51


    The percentage of Defendants’ sales that occurred via
Twitter and the relative size and scope of the RR/BAYC
secondary market are unclear. Yuga has not presented any
evidence indicating that such sales are more than negligible
relative to Defendants’ dominant sales through rrbayc.com.
Moreover, Defendants’ Twitter sales were made “person-to-
person,” raising the question of whether the Twitter platform
as a whole is a market channel or whether the Defendants’
individual user pages or accounts were individual markets
separate and distinct from other users’ accounts. But even
assuming that Twitter is one market channel, viewing the
evidence in the light most favorable to Defendants, the fifth
Sleekcraft factor heavily favors them.
        Nature of the Goods and the Purchasers
    Next, we consider the “type of goods and the degree of
care likely to be exercised by the purchaser.” Sleekcraft, 599
F.2d at 348. The degree-of-care analysis concerns whether,
in making a purchase, “a ‘reasonably prudent consumer’
would take the time to distinguish between the two product
lines.” Surfvivor Media, Inc. v. Survivor Prods., 406 F.3d
625, 634 (9th Cir. 2005) (citation omitted); see also Network
Automation, 638 F.3d at 1152 (“[T]he standard used by the
courts is the typical buyer exercising ordinary caution.”
(citation omitted)). “When the buyer has expertise in the
field, a higher standard is proper though it will not preclude
a finding that confusion is likely. Similarly, when the goods
are expensive, the buyer can be expected to exercise greater
care in his purchases; again, though, confusion may still be
likely.” Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 353 (citation omitted). “[W]e
expect consumers searching for expensive products online to
be even more sophisticated.” Network Automation, 638 F.3d
at 1153.
52                 YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


    Given the nature of NFTs, their relative novelty, and that
they remain a mystery to most consumers, they are
inherently sophisticated goods. See Michaels, supra, at 5–7;
see also Robyn Conti, What is an NFT? Non-Fungible
Tokens      Explained,     Forbes     (Sept.      9,    2022),
https://www.forbes.com/advisor/au/investing/cryptocurrenc
y/nft-non-fungible-token/; Saturday Night Live, NFTs -
SNL,         (YouTube,          Mar.         27,        2021),
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mrNOYudaMAc. They
can also be expensive goods, particularly given that they are
non-essential and virtual. Because Yuga sold its entire
BAYC NFT collection before the RR/BAYC collection
launched, a reasonably prudent customer would only
encounter BAYC NFTs for sale in the secondary market.
The BAYC NFTs have sold for steep prices in the secondary
market, including some as high as $24.4 million. On the
other hand, Defendants originally sold the RR/BAYC NFTs
for between $100 to $200, and they sold for significantly less
than BAYC NFTs on the secondary market. This extreme
price differential would likely alert a consumer that there
may be a substantive difference between the two NFT
collections, undercutting the likelihood of confusion.
Indeed, there is evidence in the record that this occurred.
    Construing all reasonable inferences in Defendants’
favor, given the nature and cost of the parties’ NFTs,
customers looking to purchase these products are likely
sophisticated. See Network Automation, 638 F.3d at 1153. In
Network Automation, we rejected the district court’s
inference that “Internet users on the whole exercise a low
degree of care” and suggested that this understanding of
web-based activity is outdated. Id.; see also id. at 1152
(“[T]he default degree of consumer care is becoming more
heightened as the novelty of the Internet evaporates and
                    YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                 53


online commerce becomes commonplace.”). We concluded
that consumers purchasing “business software” are
“sophisticated” and “exercis[e] a high degree of care.” Id. at
1152. Although the consumers in Network Automation were
businesses and here they are largely individuals, our
understanding of online shoppers seeking digital goods is
nonetheless instructive.
     Yuga relies on expert testimony about consumer surveys
to imply that “typical NFT consumers” are unsophisticated.
This evidence largely relates to the actual-confusion factor
and does not directly address whether hypothetical
reasonably prudent consumers in the NFT marketplace are
sophisticated. OTR Wheel, 897 F.3d at 1018 (To determine
whether “a reasonably prudent consumer in the marketplace
is likely to be confused as to the origin or source of the goods
or services[,] . . . the jury [must] determine whether a
hypothetical consumer would likely be confused. Evidence
of actual confusion [is] not required.” (internal quotation
marks and citations omitted)).
    Falling short of rebutting the weight of legal authority
indicating that customers seeking expensive goods are likely
sophisticated, Yuga attempts to shift the burden of proof
onto Defendants to affirmatively establish the sophistication
of NFT buyers. But it is Yuga that must establish a likelihood
of consumer confusion. Id. at 1022–23 (“The plaintiff
always maintains the burden to establish consumer
confusion.”). And there is little in the record that counters
our established principles regarding the reasonable
inferences to be drawn from the pricing and sophistication
of goods. The sixth Sleekcraft factor weighs in favor of
Defendants.
54                  YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


                     Defendants’ Intent
     The seventh factor is the defendant’s “intent in selecting
the mark.” Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 349. The relevant inquiry
is the defendant’s “intent to infringe.” Ironhawk, 2 F.4th at
1167. For claims based on a forward theory of confusion,
“we ask ‘whether [the] defendant in adopting its mark
intended to capitalize on [the] plaintiff’s good will.’”
Marketquest Grp., Inc. v. BIC Corp., 862 F.3d 927, 934 (9th
Cir. 2017) (quoting Fortune Dynamic, 618 F.3d at 1043).
“When the alleged infringer knowingly adopts a mark
similar to another’s, [we] presume that the defendant can
accomplish his purpose: that is, that the public will be
deceived.” Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 354.
    The import of this factor is not as clear-cut as the district
court made it seem. While Defendants claim that they only
intended to “undermine” Yuga’s reputation through satire,
not to trade on its goodwill, the record is replete with
evidence that they knew that Yuga was using the BAYC
marks in commerce, acknowledged the similarities between
the BAYC and RR/BAYC NFTs and that people made
“mistakes” distinguishing the two products, and admittedly
designed their product to replicate Yuga’s product to
“satir[ize] . . . the NFT craze” and “show that NFTs do not
convey rights in accompanying images.” Indeed, Defendants
claim that “the RR/BAYC Project’s satirical message could
only be conveyed by NFTs linking to the same publicly
stored and displayed images as the Bored Ape NFTs.” This
evidence favors a finding of confusion.
    But there also is evidence supporting Defendants’
contention that they intended for consumers to recognize
their sale of RR/BAYC NFTs as conceptual art or an
extended satirical project distinct from and transparently
                   YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                55


derisive of the BAYC business. Ripps is a relatively well-
known “conceptual artist” or “[a]rtist of the [i]nternet,” and
his ongoing criticism of Yuga on social media, podcasts,
traditional media, and his website, gordongoner.com,
support that Defendants’ “intent in selecting [Yuga’s]
mark[s]” was to critique, not confuse. Id. at 349. More
important, Defendants posted a disclaimer on rrbayc.com,
their primary market channel for selling RR/BAYC NFTs,
stating in part: RR/BAYC NFTs are “a new mint of BAYC
imagery, recontextualizing it for educational purposes, as
protest and satirical commentary.” And the rrbayc.com
website featured a link to gordongoner.com, where Ripps
published his criticism and commentary about Yuga and the
BAYC NFTs.
     Ultimately, the record demonstrates that Defendants
could have been fueled by dual motives. Their intent to
criticize and satirize Yuga is not incompatible with an intent
to confuse consumers. Indeed, these two motives necessarily
may be intertwined in accomplishing Ripps’s overall artistic
goal of exposing the vacuity of NFTs. And although the
relative weight of permissible and impermissible motives
may emerge at trial, we must be careful about untangling
them at summary judgment, where we must draw all
reasonable inferences in Defendants’ favor.
         Likelihood of Product-Line Expansion
    Finally, we consider the “likelihood of expansion of the
product lines.” Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 349. “The likelihood
of expansion in product lines factor is relatively unimportant
where two companies already compete to a significant
extent.” Brookfield, 174 F.3d at 1060; see GoTo.com, 202
F.3d at 1209 (“Because Disney and GoTo compete with one
another by providing similar Internet search engines, we
56                   YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


decline to evaluate the issue of whether there is a likelihood
of expansion of their product lines.”). As the district court
explained, “Yuga and Defendants both market and sell
NFTs,” so this factor does not move the needle one way or
another in this case.
                             *****
    As explained at the outset, “the Sleekcraft factors (1) are
non-exhaustive, and (2) should be applied flexibly,
particularly in the context of internet commerce.” Network
Automation, 638 F.3d at 1149 (emphasis added). And given
the nature of this inquiry, “summary judgment on ‘likelihood
of confusion’ grounds is generally disfavored.” Rearden,
683 F.3d at 1210. In this case, the district court failed to
thoroughly consider all the relevant variables that inform
whether a likelihood of consumer confusion was created by
Defendants’ use of Yuga’s marks. On the current record,
some of the Sleekcraft factors indicate a likelihood of
confusion, some do not, and some are neutral. This is true
even as to the factors that we have identified as having
special significance in internet-commerce cases. GoTo.com,
202 F.3d at 1205. Thus, viewing the facts and reasonable
inferences therefrom in the light most favorable to
Defendants, we cannot conclude as a matter of law that “a
‘reasonably prudent consumer’ in the marketplace is likely
to be confused as to the origin of the good or service bearing
one of [Yuga’s] marks.” Punchbowl, 90 F.4th 1027 (citation
omitted). Yuga may ultimately prove this element of
infringement, but it must do so before a factfinder. 15


 Because we reverse the district court’s grant of summary judgment on
15

Yuga’s trademark claim, we do not address Defendants’ remedies
challenges related to this claim.
                    YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                 57


                 II. Cybersquatting Claim
    Yuga asserts that Defendants’ use of the domain names
rrbayc.com       and     apemarket.com        was     unlawful
cybersquatting in violation of the ACPA. This statute
provides that a mark holder can assert civil liability against
a person who “has a bad faith intent to profit from [a] mark”
and “registers, traffics in, or uses a [protected] domain
name.” 15 U.S.C. § 1125(d)(1)(A). This is called
cybersquatting. See Petroliam Nasional Berhad v.
GoDaddy.com, Inc., 737 F.3d 546, 549 n.3 (9th Cir. 2013)
(defining cybersquatting “as registering a domain name
associated with a protected trademark either to ransom the
domain name to the mark holder or to divert business from
the mark holder”). The domain name must be “confusingly
similar to” a “distinctive” mark or “confusingly similar to or
dilutive of” a “famous” mark. 15 U.S.C. § 1125(d)(1)(A)(ii).
Thus, to prevail on this claim, a plaintiff must prove that “(1)
the defendant registered, trafficked in, or used a domain
name; (2) the domain name is identical or confusingly
similar to a protected mark owned by the plaintiff; and (3)
the defendant acted ‘with bad faith intent to profit from that
mark.’” Rearden, 683 F.3d at 1219 (quoting DSPT Int’l, Inc.
v. Nahum, 624 F.3d 1213, 1218–19 (9th Cir. 2010)).
    Here, the district court found that: (1) Defendants
registered the domains “rrbayc.com” and “apemarket.com”;
(2) these domain names were “confusingly similar” to
Yuga’s “bayc.com” domain name and its “‘BORED APE’
and other ‘APE’-based marks”; and (3) Defendants acted
with bad faith intent to profit from Yuga’s marks.
Defendants acknowledge that their challenge to this claim
largely rises and falls with their challenge to Yuga’s false-
designation-of-origin theory of infringement because both
58                      YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


require proving similarity that will cause consumer
confusion.
    To determine if a defendant’s domain name is
“confusingly similar” to a plaintiff’s protected mark, we
look at the mark’s distinctiveness and the likelihood of
consumer confusion in the commercial context. 16 See, e.g.,
DSPT Int’l, 624 F.3d at 1221–22; see also Elliott v. Google,
Inc., 860 F.3d 1151, 1154–57 (9th Cir. 2017) (assessing the
distinctiveness of “Google,” both linguistically and
commercially to determine whether “googledisney.com,”
“googlebarackobama.net,” and “googlenewtvs.com” were
“confusingly similar”). We have already concluded that the
BAYC marks are distinctive given their arbitrary and
arguably fanciful nature. See Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 349. But
that does not end the analysis.
    Regarding Defendants’ rrbayc.com website, we must
again consider whether the addition of the two letters “rr” is
enough to avoid consumer confusion with Yuga’s bayc.com
and BAYC Marks. Although this is a closer question here
than in the false-designation-of-origin context given the
distinctiveness of Yuga’s marks, we cannot conclude that


16
   Though similar, this test is not identical to the Sleekcraft analysis. See
DSPT Int’l, 624 F.3d at 1222 n.28. The ACPA imposes a threshold
requirement that the protected mark must be “distinctive” or “famous”
on the spectrum of distinctiveness, whereas the false-designation-of-
origin test leaves room for weaker marks if other factors indicate a
likelihood of consumer confusion. Compare 15 U.S.C. § 1125(d)(1)(A)
(imposing liability for a cybersquatter who “registers, traffics in, or uses
a domain name that . . . is identical or confusingly similar to [a
distinctive] mark . . . [or] identical or confusingly similar to or dilutive
of [a famous] mark” (emphases added)), with Network Automation, 638
F.3d at 1149 (explaining that the Sleekcraft factors “should be applied
flexibly”).
                    YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                59


rrbayc.com is “confusingly similar” to Yuga’s marks as a
matter of law because the domain names share similar
differences as the RR/BAYC and the BAYC Marks. The
addition of “rr” creates similar visual and auditory difference
and changes the meaning of the domain name in the same
way by referring to Ripps’s name. Cf. Entrepreneur Media,
279 F.3d at 1146–47 (concluding under a Sleekcraft analysis
that the entrepreneurpr.com domain was not similar to the
“ENTREPRENEUR” mark because the “differences in
sound and meaning between ‘Entrepreneur’ and
‘EntrepreneurPR’ . . . still ha[d] import in the domain name
context”).
    Defendants’ second domain, apemarket.com, is an easier
call. Yuga admits that it abandoned the “APE” mark, and it
is not among the protected marks at issue. Thus, the most
similar mark that Yuga can invoke as a comparator to
apemarket.com is “BORED APE.” While this mark is
arbitrary, there is only partial overlap with Defendants’
domain name—use of the word “Ape.” But there are also
differences on both sides of the equation: on Yuga’s side, the
adjective “BORED” modifies “APE”; on Defendants’ side,
“ape” is used as an adjective modifying “market.”
Defendants’ domain does not include the word “BORED” or
the “BORED APE” mark, and no evidence shows that the
words “ape” or “market,” individually or together, are likely
to confuse consumers.
   Accordingly, we reverse the district court’s grant of
summary judgment for Yuga on its cybersquatting claim
because we conclude that Yuga has not established as a
matter of law that these domains are “confusingly similar,”
and we do not reach the question of bad faith. See Rearden,
683 F.3d at 1219.
60                  YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


             III. Defendants’ Counterclaims
    Defendants brought several counterclaims, arguing that
Yuga violated the DMCA when it asked websites to remove
RR/BAYC images and seeking declarations that the Bored
Ape images are not entitled to copyright protection. The
district court granted summary judgment in favor of Yuga
on the DMCA counterclaim and dismissed Defendants’
declaratory-judgment claims with prejudice for lack of
subject-matter jurisdiction. Defendants challenge these
conclusions, arguing that there is a genuine dispute of fact as
to their DMCA claim and that dismissal of their declaratory-
judgment claims with prejudice was improper. We affirm the
district court’s conclusions.
          A. Digital Millennium Copyright Act
    The DMCA seeks to “combat ongoing copyright
infringement.” Rossi v. Motion Picture Ass’n of Am. Inc.,
391 F.3d 1000, 1003 (9th Cir. 2004). It established a notice-
and-takedown procedure for copyright owners to inform
internet service providers about content believed to be
infringing. 17 U.S.C. § 512(c). But it imposes liability on
“[a]ny person who knowingly materially misrepresents [in a
takedown notice] . . . that material or activity is infringing”
if a service provider relies on that misrepresentation in
removing the targeted content and thereby injures the falsely
alleged infringer. Id. § 512(f). Thus, to prevail on a false-
takedown-notice claim, a claimant must establish that: (1) a
misrepresentation in the notice led the service provider to
remove the content; and (2) the party that sent the notice had
“some actual knowledge of misrepresentation.” Rossi, 391
F.3d at 1005 (citing 17 U.S.C. § 512(f)).
    Defendants argue that Yuga sent successful takedown
notices to third-party NFT marketplaces asserting that
                      YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                     61


RR/BAYC content had infringed Yuga’s copyrighted
content. Because Yuga has not registered any copyright
associated with its NFTs, Defendants claim that its
assertions of copyright infringement were unlawful
misrepresentations under the DMCA. While Defendants
point to multiple takedown notices in the record, only three
are at issue on appeal. 17 The district court concluded that
Defendants failed to demonstrate that these notices
contained a material misrepresentation or that Yuga acted in
bad faith in sending the notices. We agree.
    In all three notices at issue, Yuga expressly invoked its
trademark rights in requesting that service providers remove
RR/BAYC content. Each notice specifically listed the
protected BAYC marks and identified various issues:
“Unauthorized use of Yuga Labs trademarks in listing name,
Icon & header images; passing off as official Yuga Labs
account; potential consumer confusion and/or harm.” While
Yuga used the subject line “Notice Under DMCA” and
stated that it was contacting the service providers as a
“DMCA Agent,” there is no indication that any service
provider receiving one of the relevant notices relied on those
representations. In fact, the service providers specifically
acknowledged that Yuga was asserting its trademark rights
and referenced the DMCA only to push back against any
insinuation that Yuga had a valid copyright claim. On this
record, Defendants’ DMCA counterclaim fails as a matter of
law. Yuga’s representations were largely accurate. Although
it did reference the DMCA, Defendants point to no record


17
  The rest of the notices did not cause service providers to remove
RR/BAYC content. See 17 U.S.C. § 512(f) (prohibiting material
misrepresentations in notices only when they cause providers to remove
the targeted content).
62                  YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


evidence that those references were knowing
misrepresentations rather than mistakes. See Rossi, 391 F.3d
at 1004–05. The statutory standard is subjective, and Yuga
“cannot be liable simply because an unknowing mistake
[wa]s made, even if [it] acted unreasonably in making the
mistake.” Id. at 1005. Referencing a copyright statute to
enforce trademark rights may have been sloppy, but we
discern no evidence of any “actual knowledge of
misrepresentation,” id., particularly where the notices
exclusively referenced trademark infringement. Moreover,
the references to the DMCA were immaterial because the
evidence does not show that service providers relied on them
to remove Defendants’ content. 17 U.S.C. § 512(f).
                 B. Declaratory Judgment
    Defendants initially pled counterclaims seeking
declarations that Yuga has no copyright in its Bored Ape
images. The district court dismissed those claims with
prejudice on jurisdictional grounds because there was no
case or controversy regarding Yuga’s ownership of
copyrighted material. On appeal, Defendants do not
challenge the merits of this dismissal, but they argue it
should have been without prejudice. We review the district
court’s form of dismissal for abuse of discretion. Bacon v.
Woodward, 104 F.4th 744, 749 (9th Cir. 2024). The district
court has wide discretion to determine whether to dismiss a
claim with or without prejudice. Hargis v. Foster, 312 F.3d
404, 412 (9th Cir. 2002) (citing Fed. R. Civ. P. 41).
    The cases Defendants cite do not demonstrate that the
district court abused its discretion; they indicate only that
dismissal without prejudice for lack of subject-matter
jurisdiction is a general rule “so that a plaintiff may reassert
his claims in a competent court.” Freeman v. Oakland
                    YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS                 63


Unified Sch. Dist., 179 F.3d 846, 847 (9th Cir. 1999)
(citation omitted); see Missouri ex rel. Koster v. Harris, 847
F.3d 646, 656 (9th Cir. 2017) (“In general, dismissal for lack
of subject matter jurisdiction is without prejudice.”
(emphasis added)). This general rule does not apply here,
however, because Yuga did not register a copyright related
to its Bored Ape images and, thus, there is no “competent
court” in which Yuga “may reassert [copyright] claims.”
Freeman, 179 F.3d at 847. And as Yuga notes, if it were to
successfully register a copyright and subsequently threaten
litigation, the district court’s dismissal with prejudice would
not bar Defendants from reasserting their declaratory-
judgment claims. Ruiz v. Snohomish Cnty. Pub. Util. Dist.
No. 1, 824 F.3d 1161, 1168 (9th. Cir. 2016) (“[T]he ‘with
prejudice’ label is not always conclusive for the purpose of
res judicata and, indeed, does not equate to an adjudication
on the merits when the dismissal is for lack of jurisdiction.”).
Accordingly, the district court did not abuse its discretion in
dismissing Defendants’ declaratory-judgment counterclaims
with prejudice.
                      CONCLUSION
    Yuga is not entitled to prevail on its trademark-
infringement and cybersquatting claims at this stage because
it has not proven as a matter of law that Defendants’
RR/BAYC project is likely to cause consumer confusion in
the marketplace. Yuga may ultimately prevail on these
claims, but to do so it must convince a factfinder at trial. But
we affirm the district court’s grant of summary judgment for
Yuga on Defendants’ DMCA counterclaim and the district
court’s dismissal of Defendants’ declaratory-judgment
counterclaims.
64                        YUGA LABS, INC. V. RIPPS


  REVERSED IN PART; AFFIRMED IN PART;
REMANDED. 18




18
     Each party to bear its own costs.