UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                             
               FOR THE DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND                          

                               )                                         
289 KILVERT, LLC, SUCCESSOR IN  )                                        
INTEREST TO PAUL AND BARRY     )                                         
MILLER PARTNERSHIP, LLC,       )                                         
                               )                                         
     Plaintiff,                )                                         
                               )                                         
     v.                        )  C.A. No. 1:23-CV-00530-MSM-PAS         
                               )                                         
SBC TOWER HOLDINGS, LLC,       )                                         
                               )                                         
     Defendant.                )                                         

                            ORDER                                        

Mary S. McElroy, United States District Judge.                            

    This is an eviction action originally (and properly) filed in the Rhode Island 
District Court, Third Division, which the plaintiff, 289 Kilvert, LLC, seeks to remand 
to  that  Court.    (ECF  No.  8.)    The  defendant,  SBC  Tower  Holdings,  LLC,  first 
attempted to remove this matter to the Rhode Island Superior Court but the Third 
Division District Court denied that request and set a trial date.  The defendant then 
removed the matter to this Court, on the grounds of diversity jurisdiction.1 
    The plaintiff is the owner and lessor of commercial property located at 289 
Kilvert Street in Warwick, Rhode Island.  When the plaintiff purchased the property, 
the previous owner assigned to the plaintiff its right to a Cellular Property Lease 
(“the Lease”).  The defendant is the other party to that Lease.           

1  The  plaintiff  does  not  challenge  that  the  statutory  requirements  of  diversity 
jurisdiction are met.    28 U.S.C. § 1332(a).                             
    The Lease provided a choice-of-law provision that states as follows: 
    Law. This Agreement shall be governed by, construed and enforced in  
    accordance with the law of the State of Rhode Island.                
    (ECF No. 8-1 ¶ 24.)                                                  

    The  defendant  and  the  plaintiff’s  predecessor  in  interest  also  executed  a 
“Fourth Amendment” to the Lease that included the following provision:    
    10.  Governing  Law.  Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary   
    contained  in  the  Lease  and  this  Amendment,  the  Lease  and  this 
    Amendment  shall  be  governed  by  and  construed  in  all  respects  in 
    accordance with the laws of the State or Commonwealth in which the   
    Leased Premises is situated, without regard to the conflicts of laws 
    provisions of such State or Commonwealth.                            
    (ECF No. 8-2 ¶ 10.)                                                  

    These provisions make clear that the parties agreed that Rhode Island law will 
apply  to  and  govern  the  Lease.    Indeed,  under  Rhode  Island  law,  “parties  are 
permitted  to  agree  that  the  law  of  a  particular  jurisdiction  will  govern  their 
transaction.”                              , 268 A.3d 556, 559-60 (R.I.   
2022).                                                                    
    The question then turns to what the law to which the parties agreed to requires 
as pertinent to this Motion to Remand.  Rhode Island law provides that the state 
“district court shall have exclusive original jurisdiction of … all actions between 
landlords and tenants pursuant to chapter 18 of title 34….”  R.I.G.L. § 8-8-3(a)(2).  
Chapter 18 of title 34 in turn provides in relevant part:                 
    If, in any case of a letting covered by this chapter, … the landlord or 
    reversioner wishing to repossess him or herself of the lands, building, or 
    parts of buildings let, or recover possession of the same from the tenant 
    … shall … institute a trespass and action for possession in the district 
    court where the premises are situated…..                             
    R.I.G.L. § 34-18.1-9.                                                
    These provisions make clear that Rhode Island law dictates that eviction 
actions such as this one are to be brought in state district court.       
    The defendant, citing                           , LLC, 15 F.4th      
70, 74 (1st Cir. 2021), argues that this Court must exercise its diversity jurisdiction 
and cannot abstain by way of the   abstention doctrine.2  But this is not an 
issue of abstention.  This is an issue of enforcing what the parties agreed to in the 

Lease, and notably there is no indication that the parties in   agreed    
to state law, much less one that included the requirement that the action be filed in 
a particular court.  Here, because the parties agreed that Rhode Island law governed, 
and because Rhode Island law, § 8-8-3(a)(2), mandates the state district court as the 
proper court for this action, the defendant is bound by that requirement and removal 
to this Court was improper.                                               

    The Court therefore GRANTS the plaintiff’s Motion to Remand (ECF No. 8) 
and REMANDS this matter to the Rhode Island District Court, Third Division, sitting 
in Kent County.                                                           





2 “      allows a federal court to dismiss a case only if it presents difficult questions 
of state law bearing on policy problems of substantial public import whose importance 
transcends the result in the case then at bar, or if its adjudication in a federal forum 
would be disruptive of state efforts to establish a coherent policy with respect to a 
matter of substantial public concern.”                          ,         
LLC, 15 F.4th 70, 75 (1st Cir. 2021).                                     
IT IS SO ORDERED.                                                         


_________________________________                                         
Mary S. McElroy                                                           
United States District Judge                                              
February 8, 2024