UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
              DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                              
__________________________________________                                
                              )                                      
3137, LLC, 541 MAIN STREET REALTY  )                                      
TRUST, EMBER PIZZA, INC., THE PORT  )                                     
RESTAURANT AND BAR, INC., JUSTIN R.  )                                    
BRACKETT, and JARED G. BRACKETT,   )                                      
                              )                                      
     Plaintiffs,              )                                      
                              )                                      
     v.                       )         Case No. 21-cv-10473-DJC     
                              )                                      
TOWN OF HARWICH, et al.,           )                                      
                              )                                      
     Defendants.              )                                      
                              )                                      
__________________________________________)                               

               MEMORANDUM AND ORDER                                  

CASPER, J.                                           March 15, 2023       

I.   Introduction                                                         

Plaintiffs 3137, LLC, 541 Main Street Realty Trust, Ember Pizza, Inc. (“Ember”), The Port 
Restaurant and Bar, Inc. (“The Port”), Justin R. Brackett and Jared G. Brackett (collectively, 
“Plaintiffs”) have filed this lawsuit against Defendants Town of Harwich, Joseph F. Powers, David 
J. Guillemette, Kevin M. Considine, Michael D. Macaskill, Larry G. Ballantine, Donald F. Howell, 
Edward J. McManus, Stephen P. Ford1 (collectively, “Town”), Gail O. Sluis (“Sluis”), Patricia A. 
O’Neill (“O’Neill”), and Does 1–10 (collectively, “Defendants”), asserting violations of their First 
and Fourteenth Amendment rights (Count I), state constitutional rights (Counts II and III),2 
intentional  interference  with  contractual  and  economic  relations  (Count  IV),  common  law 

1 Defendants notified the Court that Stephen P. Ford passed away on April 9, 2021.  D. 26.  

2 Count III alleges a deprivation of rights guaranteed by the Massachusetts Declaration of 
Rights in the Massachusetts Constitution only against the Town.  D. 37 ¶¶ 176–82.  
conspiracy (Count V) and defamation (Count VI) in connection with the Town’s enforcement of 
its Noise Ordinance (“Ordinance”) and the state’s COVID-19 restrictions.  D. 37.  The Town and 
Sluis moved to dismiss, D. 58; D. 60, which the Court granted, D. 75, dismissing those Defendants 
and Defendants Does 1-10, id. at 21 n.12.  What remains is O’Neill’s motion for judgment on the 
pleadings, D. 85, and the Plaintiffs’ second  cross-motion for leave to amend the amended 

complaint, D. 88.  For the foregoing reasons, the Court ALLOWS O’Neill’s motion for judgment 
on the pleadings and DENIES the Plaintiffs’ second cross-motion to amend.   
II.  Standard of Review                                                   
A.   Motion for Judgment on the Pleadings                            
Rule 12(c) allows a party to move for judgment on the pleadings at any time “[a]fter the 
pleadings are closed—but early enough not to delay trial.”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(c).  A motion for 
judgment on the pleadings pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(c) is “ordinarily accorded much the same 
treatment” as a Rule 12(b)(6) motion.  Aponte-Torres v. Univ. of P.R., 445 F.3d 50, 54 (1st Cir. 
2006) (citing cases).  To survive a motion for judgment on the pleadings, therefore, a plaintiff must 

plead “enough facts to state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.”  Bell Atl. Corp. v. 
Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007).  Because a motion for judgment on the pleadings “‘calls for 
an assessment of the merits of the case at an embryonic stage,’” the Court “‘view[s] the facts 
contained in the pleadings in the light most favorable to the nonmovant and draw[s] all reasonable 
inferences therefrom’” in their favor.  Perez-Acevedo v. Rivero-Cubano, 520 F.3d 26, 29 (1st Cir. 
2008) (quoting R.G. Fin. Corp. v. Vergara-Nuñez, 446 F.3d 178, 182 (1st Cir. 2006)).  
On a Rule 12(c) motion, unlike a Rule 12(b) motion, the Court considers the pleadings, 
including the answer.  See Aponte-Torres, 445 F.3d at 54–55 (citing 5C Charles Alan Wright & 
Arthur R. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure § 1368 (3d ed. 2004)).  Those assertions in the 
answer that contradict the complaint are treated as false.  Santiago v. Bloise, 741 F. Supp. 2d 357, 
360 (D. Mass. 2010) (citing cases).  In addition, “[t]he court may supplement the facts contained 
in the pleadings by considering documents fairly incorporated therein and facts susceptible to 
judicial notice.”  R.G. Fin. Corp., 446 F.3d at 182 (citing In re Colonial Mortg. Bankers Corp., 324 
F.3d 12, 15–16 (1st Cir. 2003)).                                          

B.   Motion to Amend the Complaint                                   
Rule 15(a) “mandates that leave to amend is to be ‘freely given when justice so requires’ . 
. . unless the amendment ‘would be futile, or reward, inter alia, undue or intended delay.’”  Steir 
v. Girl Scouts of the USA, 383 F.3d 7, 12 (1st Cir. 2004) (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(a)(2) and 
Resolution  Trust  Corp.  v.  Gold,  30  F.3d  251,  253  (1st  Cir.  1994)).    Rule  15(a)’s  “liberal 
amendment policy . . . does not mean that leave will be granted in all cases.”  Acosta-Mestre v. 
Hilton Int’l of P.R., Inc., 156 F.3d 49, 51 (1st Cir. 1998) (quoting 6 Charles Alan Wright, Arthur 
R. Miller & Mary Kay Kane, Federal Practice and Procedure § 1487, at 611 (2d ed. 1990)).  “[I]f 
the proposed amendment would be futile because, as thus amended, the complaint still fails to state 

a claim, the district court acts within its discretion in denying the motion to amend.”  Boston & 
Me. Corp. v. Town of Hampton, 987 F.2d 855, 868 (1st Cir. 1993) (citing cases), overruled on 
other grounds, Educadores Puertorriqueños en Acción v. Hernandez, 367 F.3d 61 (1st Cir. 2004). 
III.  Factual Background                                                  

The Court incorporates by reference the alleged facts articulated in its January 28, 2022 
Memorandum and Order on the Town’s and Sluis’ motions to dismiss, D. 75, and recites here only 
those particular allegations that pertain to O’Neill.  These facts are drawn from the amended 
complaint, D. 37, and documents referenced therein.                       
The  amended  complaint  contains  only  two  paragraphs  with  facts  specifically  about 
O’Neill.  First, O’Neill is an individual who resides in Harwich Port, Massachusetts.  D. 37 ¶ 31.  
Second, on several occasions during the summer of 2020, while O’Neill was living in Florida, the 
Plaintiffs allege she falsely reported Plaintiffs’ violations of their liquor and entertainment licenses 
and COVID-19 guidance to the Massachusetts Department of Labor Standards and the Harwich 

Health Agent.  Id. ¶ 196.  Besides these two paragraphs, the Plaintiffs generally allege throughout 
the amended complaint that O’Neill participated in a conspiracy with the other Defendants to 
“harass, cyberstalk, defame and threaten the Plaintiffs, including over social media” and to 
weaponize the Ordinance “to malign and take down Ember and The Port by selectively targeting 
each and interfering with and/or depriving them of their property rights in each establishment’s 
licenses.”  Id. ¶¶ 85, 150; see id. ¶¶ 6, 109, 190.                       
IV.  Procedural History                                                   

Plaintiffs initiated this lawsuit on March 19, 2021.  D. 1.  After the Plaintiffs amended their 
complaint, D. 37, the Town and Sluis moved to dismiss, D. 58; D. 60.  The Court heard the parties 
on the pending motions and granted the motions on January 28, 2022.  D. 75.  As O’Neill failed to 
timely file a responsive pleading, the Plaintiffs moved for entry of default against her on March 2, 
2022.  D. 77.  O’Neill filed an answer the same day as Plaintiffs’ motion, D. 78, and the Court 
denied Plaintiffs’ motion for entry of default, D. 77, against O’Neill, D. 90.  Now before the Court 
is O’Neill’s motion for judgment on the pleadings, D. 85, and Plaintiffs’ cross motion to amend 
filed in their opposition, D. 88.                                         
V.   Discussion                                                           

A.   Motion for Judgment on the Pleadings                            
     1.   Adjudication of the Motion Is Proper                       

Before proceeding to the merits of O’Neill’s motion for judgment on the pleadings, 
Plaintiffs argue that the Court is required to deny the motion because in her answer she “denie[d] 
every allegation of the Amended Complaint except one” regarding her present-day address.  D. 88 
at 3–4.  Relying on Aponte-Torres, in which the First Circuit stated, “[l]ike Rule 12(b)(6), Rule 
12(c) does not allow for any resolution of contested facts; rather, a court may enter judgment on 
the pleadings only if the uncontested and properly considered facts conclusively establish the 
movant’s entitlement to a favorable judgment,” Aponte-Torres, 445 F.3d at 54 (citing Rivera-
Gomez v. De Castro, 843 F.2d 631, 635 (1st Cir. 1988)), Plaintiffs contend that granting the motion 
would be improper because the facts here are contested.                   
As an initial matter, however, the Court notes that O’Neill did not deny every allegation of 
the amended complaint; rather, she stated she was without knowledge of the vast majority of facts 
alleged in the amended complaint.  See generally D. 78.  Of the 198 paragraphs of the amended 
complaint, only seven paragraphs specifically reference O’Neill.  D. 37 ¶¶ 6, 31, 85, 109, 150, 
190, 196.  Each of these paragraphs was denied to the extent it was an allegation against O’Neill, 
except for the paragraph detailing her address.  D. 78 ¶¶ 6, 31 (alleging her address which she 
admits), 85, 109, 150, 190, 196.  Of the six paragraphs O’Neill denied, four include no “specific, 
nonconclusory factual allegations;” instead, they include only “conclusory statements,” which 
“under Rule 12(c), courts need not credit.”  Class v. Puerto Rico, 309 F. Supp. 2d 235, 236 (D.P.R. 
2004) (citing cases); see Soto-Torres v. Fraticelli, 654 F.3d 153, 158–59 (1st Cir. 2011); D. 37 ¶ 6 
(alleging that “[u]pon information and belief, and as part of a conspiracy targeting Plaintiffs, each 
of the members of the Board, the Town Administrator, the Chief of Police and the Deputy Chief 
of Police engaged in ex-parte communications with one another and . . . other influential neighbors, 
including Patricia A. O’Neill”); id. ¶ 109 (alleging that “[u]pon information and belief, an[d] in 
retaliation for filing this action and ‘to make a point,’ the Town Defendants invoked the Rule of 
Necessity solely to drag Plaintiffs through a series of non-statutory and unconstitutional public 

hearings designed solely to harass, threaten and publicly shame Plaintiffs by hosting a ‘parade of 
horribles’  and  soliciting  embarrassing  public  testimony  from  a  selectively-curated  group  of 
influential neighbors hostile to Plaintiffs.  In particular, and as part of a conspiracy targeting 
Plaintiffs, each of the members of the Board, the Town Administrator, the Chief of Police and the 
Deputy Chief of Police engaged in ex-parte communications with one another and . . . other 
influential neighbors, including Patricia A. O’Neill”); id. ¶ 150 (alleging that “MacAskill, Powers, 
Guillemette and Powers, acting in concert with others, including without limitation . . . O’Neill, 
held a common design and agreement to invoke the unconstitutional Noise Bylaw and ever-
changing COVID-19 guidance to malign and take down Ember and The Port by selectively 

targeting  each  and  interfering  with  and/or  depriving  them  of  their  property  rights  in  each 
establishment’s licenses, and took necessary steps in furtherance thereof, including by harassing 
Plaintiffs, by making false complaints, by making not-so-veiled threats and acts of intimidation 
and  coercion  (‘good  luck’  and  ‘told  you  we  were  watching  you’),  including  by  referring 
unsubstantiated violations for discipline, providing self-serving testimony in support thereof, 
failing to provide exculpatory testimony rebutting the unsubstantiated violations, and wielding 
their influence over the Board to secure discipline in violation of Plaintiffs’ rights, in such a manner 
so inspired by malice that it shocks the conscience as it was intended to injure Plaintiffs in a way 
unjustifiable  by  any  government  interest”);  id.  ¶  190  (alleging  that  “MacAskill,  Powers, 
Guillemette and Powers, acting in concert with others, including without limitation . . . O’Neill, 
held a common design and agreement to invoke the unconstitutional Noise Bylaw and ever-
changing COVID-19 guidance to malign and take down Ember and The Port by selectively 
targeting  each  and  interfering  with  and/or  depriving  them  of  their  property  rights  in  each 
establishment’s licenses, and took necessary steps in furtherance thereof, including by harassing 

Plaintiffs, by making false complaints, by making not-so-veiled threats and acts of intimidation 
and  coercion  (‘good  luck’  and  ‘told  you  we  were  watching  you’),  including  by  referring 
unsubstantiated violations for discipline, providing self-serving testimony in support thereof, 
failing to provide exculpatory testimony rebutting the unsubstantiated violations, and wielding 
their influence over the Board to secure discipline in violation of Plaintiffs’ rights, in such a manner 
so inspired by malice that it shocks the conscience as it was intended to injure Plaintiffs in a way 
unjustifiable  by  any  government  interest”).    None  of  these  allegations  make  specific,  non-
conclusory allegations regarding any allegedly wrongful conduct by O’Neill.  Even paragraph 85, 
which at least arguably gives more specifics about the conduct of others, is still not specific about 

any wrongful conduct by O’Neill.  D. 37 ¶ 85 (alleging that “[u]pon information and belief, 
MacAskill and others are abusing his authority and trading on confidential information for private 
or political purposes.  For example, internal, non-public Town memoranda and information about 
Ember and The Port – known only to the Board and the Town – have been released to certain 
individuals, including O’Neill, . . . with the direction and understanding that the recipients use the 
information to harass, cyberstalk, defame and threaten the Plaintiffs, including over social media.  
Indeed,  ‘anonymous’  social  media  posts  include  copies  of  non-public,  ‘internal’  Town 
memoranda, . . . and posts referencing the veiled threat: ‘Told you we are paying attention’”).  
While paragraph 85 alleges that certain documents were given to O’Neill, it does not allege she 
did anything with that information that amounts to wrongful conduct.      
The only remaining paragraph from the amended complaint, which O’Neill denied in her 
answer, alleges that:                                                     
[o]n numerous occasions throughout the summer of 2020, O’Neill, individually and 
posing  as  others,  falsely  claimed  to  the  Massachusetts  Department  of  Labor 
Standards and the Harwich Health Agent that she had witnessed violations by 
Plaintiffs of their liquor and entertainment licenses and COVID-19 guidance when 
she then residing [sic] in Florida.  O’Neill knew her statements to be false (or made 
such statements with reckless disregard for the statement’s truth or falsity) and 
made such statements with the intent to cause Plaintiffs to suffer economic harm. 

D. 37 ¶ 196.  To begin, this paragraph was only incorporated into the defamation claim (Count VI) 
and not incorporated by reference into the other counts against O’Neill.  Id. ¶¶ 194–98.  Even 
assuming that it was so incorporated, the paragraph does not set forth “specific, nonconclusory 
factual allegations regarding each material element necessary to sustain recovery.”  Class, 309 F. 
Supp. 2d at 236 (citing cases).  Certainly, in adjudicating a Rule 12(c) motion, the First Circuit has 
cautioned: “[s]ome allegations, while not stating ultimate legal conclusions, are nevertheless so 
threadbare or speculative that they fail to cross “the line between the conclusory and the factual.’”  
Soto-Torres, 654 F.3d at 159 (quoting Peñalbert-Rosa v. Fortuño-Burset, 631 F.3d 592, 595 (1st 
Cir. 2011)).  Following the First Circuit’s warning, this Court finds the paragraph “‘threadbare’” 
and “‘speculative,’” as it does not include any specific information about what exactly O’Neill 
said, which aspects of the licenses or COVID-19 guidance the Plaintiffs supposedly violated, how 
she knew the alleged violations did not occur, or any other “material element necessary to sustain 
recovery.”  Id. (quoting Peñalbert-Rosa, 631 F.3d at 595); Class, 309 F. Supp. 2d at 236 (citing 
cases).                                                                   
Even assuming, arguendo, that this paragraph alleged sufficiently specific, nonconclusory 
factual allegations regarding the material elements necessary to sustain recovery, this Court is not 
engaging in the “resolution of contested facts.”  Aponte-Torres, 445 F.3d at 54 (citing Rivera-
Gomez, 843 F.2d at 635).  Instead, as evidenced by its analysis below as to each of the claims 
against O’Neill, the Court is crediting “all of the allegations of the non-moving party . . . as true,” 

for purposes of adjudicating the motion.  Salform Inc. v. Anvil Int’l, LLC, No. 19-cv-796-LM, 
2020 WL 4340274, at *3 (D.N.H. July 28, 2020) (citing Villeneuve v. Avon Prod., Inc., 919 F.3d 
40, 49 (1st Cir. 2019)).                                                  
Accordingly, to the extent that Plaintiffs were seeking denial of the motion for judgment 
on the pleadings due to the denials in O’Neill’s answer, such denial is not warranted.  
     2.   Constitutional Claims (Count I)                            

Plaintiffs assert Count I against O’Neill for alleged violations of their First and Fourteenth 
Amendment rights, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. §§ 1983 and 1985.                 
  Plaintiffs’ § 1983 claim against O’Neill fails because the amended complaint does not 
allege the necessary predicate that O’Neill, a private citizen, acted “under color of law.”  See 
Davignon v. Hodgson, 524 F.3d 91, 112 (1st Cir. 2008).  Nevertheless, Plaintiffs argue that, when 
“combined with the assistance or participation of the Town defendants,” O’Neill’s actions can 
constitute state action as required for a § 1983 claim.  D. 88 at 9 (citing, inter alia, Lugar v. 
Edmondson Oil Co., 457 U.S. 922, 939–42 (1982)).  The amended complaint, however, alleges no 
facts that O’Neill acted in concert with the Town defendants.  The amended complaint includes 
generalized allegations against O’Neill, including that “internal, non-public Town memoranda and 
information about Ember and The Port – known only to the Board and the Town – have been 
released to certain individuals, including O’Neill . . . with the direction and understanding that the 
recipients use the information to harass, cyberstalk, defame and threaten the Plaintiffs, including 
over social media” and “as part of a conspiracy targeting Plaintiffs, each of the members of the 
Board, the Town Administrator, the Chief of Police and the Deputy Chief of Police engaged in ex-
parte communications with one another and . . . Patricia A. O’Neill . . . .”  D. 37 ¶¶ 85, 109.  But 
these generalized allegations include no supporting, specific facts implicating O’Neill.  No actions 

by O’Neill are alleged following these alleged directions to harass, cyberstalk, defame and threaten 
the  Plaintiffs,  and  no  actions  were  attributed  to  O’Neill  following  the  alleged  ex  parte 
communications.  See Glaros v. Perse, 628 F.2d 679, 684–85 (1st Cir. 1980) (affirming dismissal 
of  §  1983  claims  against  private  individuals  because,  among  other  reasons,  “[a]part  from 
conclusory statements that all defendants acted under color of law, and generalized allegations of 
conspiracy between all defendants, there was only the allegation that the individual private 
defendants ‘cooperated in the surveillance of plaintiff on the request of government agencies,’” 
which does not “make out a claim of action taken under color of state law”); Tynecki v. Tufts 
Univ. Sch. of Dental Med., 875 F. Supp. 26, 30 (D. Mass. 1994) (dismissing § 1983 claim because 

the complaint only alleged “that the defendants violated the plaintiff’s rights ‘under color of state 
law,’” but “contain[ed] no factual support therefore”).                   
Plaintiffs’ § 1985 claim also fails to state a claim because “a plaintiff may recover only 
when the conspiratorial conduct of which he complains is propelled by some racial, or perhaps 
otherwise class-based, invidiously discriminatory animus,” Perkins v. City of Attleboro, 969 F. 
Supp. 2d 158, 178 (D. Mass. 2013) (quoting Aulson v. Blanchard, 83 F.3d 1, 3 (1st Cir. 1996)) 
(internal  quotation  marks  omitted),  and  here  Plaintiffs  do  not  allege  racial  or  class-based 
discrimination.                                                           
Accordingly,  Plaintiffs  have  not  plausibly  stated  a  First  Amendment  or  Fourteenth 
Amendment claim against O’Neill.                                          
     3.   Massachusetts Civil Rights Act (“MCRA”) (Count II)         

O’Neill argues that the MCRA claim against her fails because there is no allegation that 
she threatened, intimidated, or coerced any of the Plaintiffs into relinquishing their constitutional 
rights.  D. 86 at 11.   “To establish a claim under the [MCRA], the plaintiffs must prove that (1) 
their exercise or enjoyment of rights secured by the Constitution or laws of either the United States 
or of the Commonwealth, (2) have been interfered with, or attempted to be interfered with, and (3) 
that the interference or attempted interference was by threats, intimidation or coercion.”  Swanset 
Dev. Corp. v. City of Taunton, 423 Mass. 390, 395 (1996) (citing Mass. Gen. L. c. 12, § 11I) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted).  Plaintiffs acknowledge that violations of the 
MCRA frequently involve an “actual or potential physical confrontation accompanied by a threat 
of harm,” but contend “economic coercion, standing alone, may be actionable under the MCRA.”  
D. 88 at 13 (citing Planned Parenthood League of Mass., Inc. v. Blake, 417 Mass. 467, 473 (1994), 

and Buster v. George W. Moore, Inc., 438 Mass. 635, 647–48 (2003)) (internal quotation marks 
omitted).  While it is true that it remains possible “in certain circumstances” for economic coercion 
“to be actionable under the [MCRA],” Buster, 438 Mass. at 648, Plaintiffs’ amended complaint is 
devoid of allegations that O’Neill engaged in economic coercion, that Plaintiffs feared economic 
harm specifically caused by O’Neill, or that Plaintiffs refrained from any conduct because of her 
specific actions.  Indeed, the only allegations against O’Neill are that she received a nonpublic 
Town memorandum and that she had ex parte communications with the Town defendants.  D. 37 
¶¶ 85, 109.  Further, to the extent they could be viewed as threats, the specific “[g]ood luck” and 
“[t]old you we are paying attention” statements alleged in the amended complaint were not 
attributed to O’Neill.  D. 37 ¶¶ 64, 85.  The amended complaint only contains conclusory assertions 
that Plaintiffs were subjected to actionable conduct here by O’Neill, which is insufficient to 
support the MCRA claim.  See, e.g., D. 37 ¶ 109 (alleging that “as part of a conspiracy targeting 
Plaintiffs, each of the members of the Board, the Town Administrator, the Chief of Police and the 
Deputy Chief of Police engaged in ex-parte communications with one another and . . . other 

influential neighbors, including Patricia A. O’Neill”); id. ¶ 150 (alleging that certain defendants, 
including O’Neill, “held a common design and agreement to invoke the unconstitutional Noise 
Bylaw and ever-changing COVID-19 guidance to malign and take down Ember and The Port by 
selectively targeting each and interfering with and/or depriving them of their property rights in 
each establishment’s licenses, and took necessary steps in furtherance thereof, including by 
harassing Plaintiffs, by making false complaints, by making not-so-veiled threats and acts of 
intimidation and coercion (‘good luck’ and ‘told you we were watching you’), including by 
referring unsubstantiated violations for discipline, providing self-serving testimony in support 
thereof, failing to provide exculpatory testimony rebutting the unsubstantiated violations, and 

wielding their influence over the Board to secure discipline in violation of Plaintiffs’ rights, in 
such a manner so inspired by malice that it shocks the conscience as it was intended to injure 
Plaintiffs in a way unjustifiable by any government interest”); Longval v. Comm’r of Corr., 404 
Mass. 325, 333 (1989) (noting that “[a] direct violation of a person’s rights does not by itself 
involve threats, intimidation, or coercion and thus does not implicate the [MCRA]” (citing 
Pheasant Ridge Assocs. Ltd. P’ship v. Burlington, 399 Mass. 771, 781 (1987))). 
Accordingly, Plaintiffs have failed to state a claim against O’Neill for violation of the 
MCRA.                                                                     
     4.   Interference with Contractual Relations (Count IV)         
Count IV fails for the same reasons the Court stated in its January 28, 2022 Memorandum 
and Order.  D. 75 at 17 (dismissing interference with contractual relations claim because Plaintiffs 
failed to allege that Defendants were aware of any specific contractual relationship or knowingly 
induced third parties to break their contractual relationships with Plaintiffs).  Plaintiffs fail to allege 
the necessary components for an interference with contractual relations claim as to O’Neill, 

including that she was aware of Plaintiff’s business relationships with particular third parties or 
that she knowingly induced those third parties to break their agreements.  The Court incorporates 
by reference that analysis of Count IV and allows the motion for judgment on the pleadings as to 
Count IV.                                                                 
     5.   Common Law Conspiracy (Count V)                            

“Two types of civil conspiracy exist under Massachusetts law.  The first ‘requires proof of 
coercion; the second requires proof of a common plan to commit a tortious act.’”  Fiorillo v. 
Winiker, 85 F. Supp. 3d 565, 576 (D. Mass. 2015) (quoting Kurker v. Hill, 44 Mass. App. Ct. 184, 
188–89 (1998)).  “Under the first type of conspiracy, a plaintiff ‘must allege that defendants, acting 
in unison, had some peculiar power of coercion over plaintiff that they would not have had if they 
had been acting independently.’”  Id.  (quoting Aetna Casualty Sur. Co. v. P & B Autobody, 43 
F.3d 1546, 1563 (1st Cir. 1994)).  “For the second type of conspiracy, the plaintiff must allege 
‘first, a common design or an agreement, although not necessarily express, between two or more 
persons to do a wrongful act and, second, proof of some tortious act in furtherance of the 
agreement.’”  Id. (quoting Aetna Casualty Sur. Co., 43 F.3d at 1564).     
O’Neill  argues  that  the  amended  complaint  contains  no  factual  allegations  of  her 
involvement in a conspiracy, of any power of coercion she had over Plaintiffs, or of any affirmative 
actions on her part in furtherance of the conspiracy.  D. 86 at 14–15.  Plaintiffs do not address 
these arguments in their opposition and instead challenge this Court’s reasoning from its January 
28, 2022 Memorandum and Order, dismissing Count V against the Town and Sluis.  D. 88 at 15–
17.    The Court previously dismissed Count V against the other defendants because Plaintiffs did 
not allege that those Defendants had any “peculiar power of coercion” over them, and Plaintiffs 
did not allege any tortious acts committed in furtherance of any agreement.  D. 75 at 18.  Here, 

Plaintiffs argue that O’Neill exhibited a “peculiar power of coercion” over them through her joint 
participation in state action with the Town defendants and that the underlying tortious act was “that 
the Board held a common plan to retaliate against Plaintiffs through economic coercion during a 
pandemic by breaching its statutory obligation to promptly renew Plaintiffs’ entertainment and 
liquor licenses, and solicited and relied upon O’Neill’s, Sluis’s and others’ substantial assistance 
(in providing false and malicious statements that Plaintiffs were violating COVID-19 guidance) to 
do so.”  D. 88 at 16.  These arguments are unavailing because not only does this still fail to allege 
a  specific  tort,  but,  as  discussed  above,  the  amended  complaint  also  contains  no  specific, 
nonconclusory factual allegations regarding O’Neill’s joint participation in state action or exercise 

of economic coercion over Plaintiffs.                                     
Plaintiffs next direct the Court’s attention to two cases, Thomas v. Town of Salisbury, 134 
F. Supp. 3d 633 (D. Mass. 2015), and The Patriot Group, LLC v. Edmands, 96 Mass. App. Ct. 478 
(2019), D. 88 at 16–17, neither of which warrants a different outcome.  First, in Thomas, the court 
ruled that plaintiffs had stated a claim for conspiracy, where they alleged defendants “acted in 
concert to inflict a wrong on Thomas by, among other things, initiating and orchestrating a flawed 
and biased investigation of Thomas.”  D. 88 at 16 (quoting Thomas, 134 F. Supp. 3d at 649).  But 
the plaintiff in Thomas did much more than simply allege the aforementioned statement; he also 
alleged a series of other specific facts by the alleged co-conspirators, which the court found 
sufficient.  Thomas, 134 F. Supp. 3d at 650.  Plaintiffs here have only alleged generalized 
statements of participation in a conspiracy, with no specific allegations of O’Neill’s actions.  
Second,  Plaintiffs  argue  that  they  are  not  required  under  Massachusetts  law  to  proffer 
particularized allegations of O’Neill’s knowledge or actual participation in the alleged conspiracy, 
relying upon The Patriot Group, LLC, 96 Mass. App. Ct. at 489.  D. 88 at 17.  While the 

Massachusetts Appeals Court noted there that “knowledge, like other conditions of mind, can be 
averred generally,” it did not state that a defendant’s participation in an alleged conspiracy can be 
averred generally.  The Patriot Group, LLC, 96 Mass. App. Ct. at 489 (quoting Baker v. Wilmer 
Cutler Pickering Hale & Dorr, LLP, 91 Mass. App. Ct. 835, 849 (2017)) (internal quotation marks 
omitted).  To the contrary, the plaintiff in The Patriot Group, LLC alleged facts about the 
defendant’s specific actions taken in furtherance of the conspiracy, which Plaintiffs did not do 
here.  Id.                                                                
Accordingly, Plaintiffs have not plausibly stated a conspiracy claim against O’Neill. 
     6.   Defamation (Count VI)                                      

“To prevail on a defamation claim, a plaintiff must ‘establish that the defendants published 
a false statement about him to a third party that either caused him economic loss or was the type 
that is actionable without proof of economic loss.’” Driscoll v. Bd. of Trs. of Milton Acad., 70 
Mass. App. Ct. 285, 295–96 (2007) (quoting Phelan v. May Dept. Stores Co., 443 Mass. 52, 55–
56 (2004)).  Plaintiffs allege that O’Neill falsely reported to the Massachusetts Department of 
Labor Standards and the Harwich Health Agent that she had witnessed Plaintiffs violate their 
liquor and entertainment licenses and COVID-19 guidance while she was living in Florida.  D. 37 
¶ 196.  Even assuming this is true, Plaintiffs have failed to state a defamation claim against O’Neill.    
“To properly allege defamation, a plaintiff must specifically identify the allegedly false 
statement,” and “allegation[s] that the defendant made statements that ‘cast the plaintiff in a 
negative light,’ but that do[] not identify a specific statement, [are] not sufficient.”  Kelleher v. 
Lowell Gen. Hosp., 98 Mass. App. Ct. 49, 53 n.2 (2020), rev. denied, 486 Mass. 1104 (2020) 
(internal citation omitted).  Here, the single paragraph in the amended complaint that mentions 

O’Neill’s reports to the Massachusetts Department of Labor Standards and the Harwich Health 
Agent  do  not  identify  her  actual  statement  to  those  authorities,  which  violations  Plaintiffs 
committed, or how O’Neill knew the violations did not occur.  See D. 37 ¶ 196; Piccone v. Bartels, 
785 F.3d 766, 772 (1st Cir. 2015) (explaining that a court’s inquiry as to whether a statement is a 
verifiable fact or opinion requires consideration of the “specific challenged statements” made).   
Plaintiffs contend, as they did in their opposition to the Town’s and Sluis’ motions to 
dismiss, that O’Neill’s alleged statements are per se defamation because she accused Plaintiffs of 
violating criminal laws.  The Court explained in its January 28, 2022 Memorandum and Order 
that, even as alleged, the statements in the amended complaint refer to violations of state and local 

COVID-19 guidance, not criminal laws.  D. 75 at 19 n.10.  Undeterred, Plaintiffs respond that 
“[t]his ignores the Plaintiffs’ allegation that the Board has continuously maintained and wielded 
Governor Baker’s COVID-19 Executive Orders as ‘carrying the force of law,’ the violation of 
which was an ‘illegality’ constituting a violation of 204 C.M.R. [§] 2. 05(2), and the very legal 
basis to host the Board’s disciplinary proceedings.”  D. 88 at 18.  But this does not change the fact 
that a violation of 204 C.M.R. § 2.05(2) is not a violation of a criminal law.  
Plaintiffs further contend that the Fourteenth Amendment offers protection against a 
severely  defamatory  charge,  where  the  defamation  might  seriously  damage  an  individual’s 
reputation or impose a stigma upon them.  Id.  They suggest that defamatory statements regarding 
violations of COVID-19 guidance satisfy these criteria, Id. at 18–19, but it remains that the  
amended complaint does not sufficiently identify O’Neill’s allegedly defamatory statements. 
For at least the reasons articulated above, Plaintiffs have failed to state a defamation claim 
against O’Neill.                                                          
B.   Second Motion for Leave to Amend                                

Plaintiffs seek leave to file a second amended complaint, D. 88, but this motion to amend 
suffers from the same defects as the first.  The Court denied Plaintiffs’ first motion for leave to 
amend because they had “not specified any additional facts or claims they would include in a 
further amended complaint.”  D. 91.  This same issue plagues the instant motion.   
Throughout Plaintiffs’ motion, they state that, if afforded the opportunity to file a second 
amended complaint, they will, among other things, (1) “allege additional facts supporting their 
claims that O’Neill . . . actively encouraged and w[as] [a] ‘joint participant[]’ in the Town’s biased 
and selective enforcement of the Ordinance and COVID-19 guidance, and thus  acted under state 
law;” (2) “allege that O’Neill . . . privately communicated with the Town defendants and w[as] 

coached by them to make complaints that Plaintiffs were then violating COVID-19 guidance;” (3) 
“allege detailed facts concerning restaurants additional to Perks . . . including the establishment’s 
size, location and operational licenses;” (4) “allege that O’Neill . . . because of extensive public 
outreach and news coverage of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, w[as] acutely aware of and 
perceived Plaintiffs’ ongoing compliance with COVID-19 guidance as a ‘social contract,’ whereby 
publicly  and  falsely  accusing  Plaintiffs  of  noncompliance  necessary  causes  existing  and 
prospective customers to refuse to patronize Plaintiffs’ restaurants;” (5) “allege that O’Neill, 
despite having never set foot in either restaurant during the pandemic, and having no personal 
knowledge thereof, is believed to be the owner and creator of dozens of false social media accounts 
to allege and peddle spiteful and malicious allegations of noncompliance from the comfort of her 
Florida home;” (6) “allege additional facts concerning how O’Neill . . . knew [her] statements were 
false, or that [she] acted with reckless disregard of the falsity of such statements given that [she] 
was aware that the Board of Health . . . were at all times fully aware of the defendants’ accusations 
of noncompliance and that the same were false or unfounded;” (7) “allege that Meggan Eldredge 

and other officials informed O’Neill . . . that such ‘subsequent’ violations were likewise false or 
unfounded.”  D. 88 at 10–11, 14–15, 19.  However, nowhere in their cross-motion do the Plaintiffs 
state what these new facts actually are.                                  
Even more fatal to Plaintiffs’ motion is the fact that, assuming all these proposed new 
allegations are true, they would not save any of their claims from dismissal.  For instance, 
Plaintiff’s § 1983 claim against O’Neill would not survive a 12(b)(6) challenge because, even if 
these new facts demonstrated she acted under color of law when making false statements, to make 
out a successful § 1983 claim against O’Neill, Plaintiffs would still need to demonstrate that her 
actions violated a right secured by the Constitution and laws of the United States.  West v. Atkins, 

487 U.S. 42, 48 (1988) (citing cases).  But Plaintiffs have alleged no additional facts regarding 
how O’Neill’s alleged false statements led inexorably to a violation of their rights.  Alleging 
detailed facts “concerning restaurants additional to Perks . . . including the establishment’s size, 
location and operational licenses” would also not make a difference to the Plaintiffs’ additional 
constitutional claim.  D. 88 at 11.  As the Court explained in its January 28, 2022 Memorandum 
and Order, Plaintiffs would need to demonstrate other establishments are similarly situated in all 
respects, including “whether residents had reported violations to the Harwich Police regarding 
noise or COVID-19 guidance, previous violations (save for Perks), or the specific circumstances 
of the alleged violations charged to each establishment, if any.”  D. 75 at 14; see D. 37 ¶ 91 (noting 
that Perks received a one day suspension of its entertainment license but admitting that it had only 
two confirmed Ordinance violations in 2019 and not providing details of prior discipline served).  
Plaintiffs have not alleged they would make such a showing.  D. 88 at 11.  This is particularly 
notable, where this litigation revolves around Defendants’ alleged use of fabricated Ordinance 
violations and violations of COVID-19 guidance to target Plaintiffs.      

Likewise, Plaintiffs’ economic coercion claim under the MCRA would fail because, even 
if they demonstrated O’Neill was a joint participant in state action through her false statements, D. 
88 at 13, they have still alleged no facts that they feared economic harm because of her and her 
false statements, that they refrained from any conduct because of her, or that these circumstances 
are of the limited, “certain circumstances” in which the Supreme Judicial Court envisioned 
economic coercion being actionable under the MCRA, Buster, 438 Mass. at 648.  So, too, would 
Plaintiffs’ tortious interference claim fail.  Simply offering to “allege that O’Neill . . . because of 
extensive public outreach and news coverage of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, w[as] acutely 
aware of and perceived Plaintiffs’ ongoing compliance with COVID-19 guidance as a ‘social 

contract,’ whereby publicly and falsely accusing Plaintiffs of noncompliance necessary causes 
existing and prospective customers to refuse to patronize Plaintiffs’ restaurants” does nothing to 
satisfy the other necessary components of such a claim, including that O’Neill had knowledge of 
Plaintiff’s business relationships with particular third parties, and how or if O’Neill knowingly 
induced those third parties to break their agreements  D. 88 at 14.       
 Additionally, even assuming Plaintiffs sufficiently “allege additional facts establishing a 
common tortious plan involving O’Neill, . . . and the Town defendants, including that O’Neill . . . 
knowingly made false complaints to Town Defendants and the Department of Labor concerning 
violations of COVID-19 guidance, and w[as] even coached by the Town Defendants to provide 
specific information as against Plaintiffs’ restaurants, with the understanding that the Town 
Defendants would utilize those complaints to refuse to uphold their statutory obligation  to 
promptly renew Plaintiffs’ entertainment and liquor licenses,” Plaintiffs’ conspiracy claims cannot 
be resurrected from dismissal because they have yet to sufficiently allege an underlying tort.  D. 
88 at 17.  The only torts alleged in the amended complaint are intentional interference with 

contractual relations and defamation.  As described above, the tortious interference claim still fails, 
even assuming these new proposed allegations are true.  Similarly, Plaintiffs’ defamation claim 
fails because the new allegations fail to offer which exact statements O’Neill made to the 
Massachusetts Department of Labor Standards and the Harwich Health Agent or how those 
statements specifically caused Plaintiffs economic loss or was the type that is actionable without 
proof of economic loss—both necessary predicates to a defamation claim.  See, e.g., Kelleher, 98 
Mass. App. Ct. at 53 n.2 (internal citation omitted); Driscoll, 70 Mass. App. Ct. at  295–96 (2007) 
(quoting Phelan, 443 Mass. at 55–56).                                     
Plaintiffs, therefore, have failed to show why amendment would not be futile, warranting 

denial of their second request to amend.  See Aponte-Torres, 445 F.3d at 58; Monroe v. Medtronic, 
Inc., 511 F. Supp. 3d 26, 40 (D. Mass. 2021).                             
VI.  Conclusion                                                           
For these reasons, the Court ALLOWS the motion for judgment on the pleadings, D. 85, 
and DENIES the second motion for leave to amend, D. 88.                   
So Ordered.                                                          

                                   /s/ Denise J. Casper              
                                   United States District Judge

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
              DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                              
__________________________________________                                
                              )                                      
3137, LLC, 541 MAIN STREET REALTY  )                                      
TRUST, EMBER PIZZA, INC., THE PORT  )                                     
RESTAURANT AND BAR, INC., JUSTIN R.  )                                    
BRACKETT, and JARED G. BRACKETT,   )                                      
                              )                                      
     Plaintiffs,              )                                      
                              )                                      
     v.                       )         Case No. 21-cv-10473-DJC     
                              )                                      
TOWN of HARWICH, et al.,           )                                      
                              )                                      
     Defendants.              )                                      
                              )                                      
__________________________________________)                               

               MEMORANDUM AND ORDER                                  

CASPER, J.                                          January 28, 2022      

I.   Introduction                                                         

Plaintiffs 3137, LLC, 541 Main Street Realty Trust, Ember Pizza, Inc. (“Ember”), The Port 
Restaurant  and  Bar,  Inc.  (“The  Port”),  Justin  Brackett  and  Jared  Brackett  (collectively, 
“Plaintiffs”) have filed this lawsuit against Defendants Town of Harwich, Joseph F. Powers, David 
J. Guillemette, Kevin M. Considine, Michael D. Macaskill, Larry G. Ballantine, Donald F. Howell, 
Edward J. McManus, Stephen P. Ford1 (collectively, “Town”), Gail O. Sluis (“Sluis”), Patricia A. 
O’Neill (“O’Neill”), and Does 1-10 (collectively, “Defendants”), asserting violations of their First 
and Fourteenth Amendment rights (Count I), the Massachusetts Civil Rights Act (“MCRA”) and 
state  constitutional  rights  (Counts  II  and  III),  intentional  interference  with  contractual  and 
economic relations (Count IV), common law conspiracy (Count V) and defamation (Count VI) in 

1 Defendants notified the Court that Stephen P. Ford passed away on April 9, 2021.  D. 26.   
connection with the Town’s enforcement of its Noise Ordinance (“Ordinance”) and the state’s 
COVID-19 restrictions.  D. 37.  The Town defendants and Sluis have moved to dismiss.  D. 58; 
D. 60.  For the reasons discussed below, the Court ALLOWS the motions.    
II.  Standard of Review                                                   
On a motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted pursuant 

to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6), the Court must determine if the facts alleged “plausibly narrate a claim 
for relief.”  Schatz v. Republican State Leadership Comm., 669 F.3d 50, 55 (1st Cir. 2012) (citation 
omitted).  Reading the complaint “as a whole,” the Court must conduct a two-step, context-specific 
inquiry.  García-Catalán v. United States, 734 F.3d 100, 103 (1st Cir. 2013).  First, the Court must 
perform a close reading of the claim to distinguish the factual allegations from the conclusory legal 
allegations contained therein.  Id.  Factual allegations must be accepted as true, while conclusory 
legal conclusions are not entitled credit.  Id.  Second, the Court must determine whether the factual 
allegations present a “reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the conduct alleged.”  
Haley v. City of Boston, 657 F.3d 39, 46 (1st Cir. 2011) (citation omitted).  In sum, the complaint 

must provide sufficient factual allegations for the Court to find the claim “plausible on its face.”  
García-Catalán, 734 F.3d at 103 (citation omitted).                       
III.  Factual Background                                                  

The following facts are drawn from the amended complaint, D. 37, and documents 
referenced therein, and the Court assumes the well-pled facts to be true for the purpose of resolving 
the motions to dismiss.2                                                  

2 Both motions seek dismissal on the basis that Plaintiffs have failed to comply with the pleading 
requirements set forth in Fed. R. Civ. P. 8.  See D. 59 at 29; D. 61 at 5.  As noted above, the Court 
only has considered the alleged facts that are well-pled and has “ignore[d] statements in the 
complaint that simply offer legal labels and conclusions.”  Schatz, 669 F.3d at 55.  Accordingly, 
dismissal on Rule 8 grounds is not warranted.                             
A.   The Port and Ember                                              

The Port and Ember are restaurants in Harwich, Massachusetts.  D. 37 ¶ 37.  Both 
restaurants have previously held a liquor license granted annually (or seasonally) by the Harwich 
Board of Selectmen (“Board”) and approved by the Massachusetts Alcoholic Beverages Control 
Commission (“ABCC”).  Id.  Both restaurants have also held an entertainment license, which 
allows them to play music (amplified or acoustic) indoors and outdoors, at certain times.  Id. ¶ 39. 
B.   Ordinance Violations and Discipline                             

Harwich’s Ordinance provides, in relevant part, that, “[i]t shall be unlawful for any person 
or persons to cause or allow any noise which emanates from any building, boat, structure, vehicle, 
premises, or any sound amplification system, which is plainly audible at a distance of 150 feet 
from any such building, boat, structure, vehicle, premises or sound amplification system.”  Id. ¶ 
42; D.  37-3 at 1.  Plainly audible noise “constitute[s] prima facie evidence of a violation.”  Id.  
The Ordinance defines “plainly audible” as “[a]ny sound from a source regulated by this bylaw 
that can be detected above routine or normal ambient background noise by unaided human 
hearing.”  Id. ¶ 44.                                                      
In June 2019, following increased noise complaints, the Town established a seven-member 
noise committee, which originally included an employee of Sluis’ restaurant but no representative 
from Plaintiffs’ restaurants.  Id. ¶ 67.  A representative from one of Plaintiffs’ restaurants was later 
added to the committee but the noise committee was disbanded shortly after his appointment.  Id. 
¶ 68.                                                                     
Plaintiffs allege that false noise complaints against Ember were called into Harwich Police, 
orchestrated by the owner of Perks, a competitor, and that the Town selectively enforced the 
Ordinance and lacked a written policy for same.  Id. ¶¶ 57, 69-70, 72.  In September 2019, the 
Town  Administrator  issued  findings  that  four of  the  complaints  showed  a  violation  of  the 
Ordinance.  Id. ¶ 69.  On October 28, 2019, the Board voted to suspend Ember’s entertainment 
license for two days, and limited Ember’s entertainment license on five additional days to acoustic 
only performances.  Id. ¶ 70.  At that meeting, the Board indicated that “there will be a second 
hearing for . . . additional violations.”  D. 37-11 at 3-4.  On February 27, 2020, the Town 

Administrator held a further hearing to address the violations, where Town counsel Gregg Corbo 
(“Corbo”) advised the Board on hearing procedure and presented the Town’s case against Ember.  
D. 37 ¶¶ 73-74.  On August 3, 2020, in light of additional Ordinance violations and the fact that 
Plaintiffs did not serve at least some of their prior suspension in summer 2020 (due to the 
pandemic), the Board voted to rescind its prior discipline and impose a seven-day suspension of 
Ember’s entertainment license covering all the 2019 Ordinance violations.  Id. ¶ 90; D. 37-31.  
Plaintiffs allege that the seven-day suspension was erroneously imposed and failed to consider its 
responses to the underlying violation reports.  D. 37 ¶ 90.  At the same meeting, the Board voted 
to  suspend  Perks’  entertainment  license  for  one  day,  despite  three  written  warnings,  one 

unconfirmed violation, five confirmed violations between 2016 and 2018, and two confirmed 
violations in 2019.  Id. ¶ 91.  On August 13, 2020, the Board imposed the suspension of Ember’s 
entertainment license.  Id.  ¶ 72.  Ember did not receive any noise complaints in 2020.  Id.   
C.   COVID-19 Restrictions                                           
By May 2020, Massachusetts COVID-19 guidance allowed restaurants to remain open for 
takeout food and alcohol sales.  Id. ¶ 76.  On May 28, 2020, the Harwich Police Deputy Chief 
referred several alleged violations of the guidance by The Port and Ember to the Town.  Id. ¶ 78; 
D. 37-16.   Plaintiffs allege that these violations were unsupported by the narratives of Harwich 
police investigating the violations.  Id. ¶ 78.  Plaintiffs further allege that the Town did not 
discipline other establishments for violating the state restrictions by allowing alcohol consumption 
on-premises and hosting live entertainment.  See id. ¶¶ 76-79.            
In July 2020, Harwich restaurants were allowed to seat patrons outside and patrons could 
consume alcohol so long as they were served by wait staff and food was available for purchase.  
Id. ¶ 80.  On July 10, 2020, a Harwich Police officer accused The Port of allowing a patron to exit 

the restaurant with an open container of alcohol and demanded that The Port install a doorman 
every night of the summer.  Id. ¶ 81.  Plaintiffs allege that the “offending can of alcohol” was sold 
by Perks.  Id.  ¶ 82.  The Port filed a complaint about the incident with the Harwich Police 
Department, but no action was taken.  Id. ¶ 83.  Six days after Plaintiffs filed the complaint, on 
July 16 and 17, 2020, three investigators from the ABCC visited The Port and claimed that it had 
violated the State’s “phase 2” COVID-19 guidance, although The Port alleges it was then operating 
under “phase 3” guidance.  Id. ¶ 86; D. 37-37 at 42-43.  Plaintiffs allege that ABCC investigators 
did not visit any other licensed establishment in the Town at that time.  D. 37 ¶ 86. 
D.   Board Hearings                                                  

On August 12, 2020, the Board held a remote disciplinary hearing regarding Plaintiffs’ 
alleged COVID-19 violations that was subsequently suspended due to technical difficulties.  Id. 
¶¶ 92-93.  At the hearing, Corbo advised the Board on questions of procedure and evidence and 
led direct examination of witnesses.  Id. ¶ 93.  The hearing was continued until January 12, 2021, 
despite Plaintiffs and their counsel being unavailable.  Id. ¶¶ 97-98.    
Meanwhile, Plaintiffs had applied to renew their entertainment license from the Town in 
November 2020.  Id. ¶ 96.  On February 21, 2021, the Board approved entertainment licenses for 
other establishments, but not Plaintiffs’ restaurants.  Id. ¶ 100.  The Board declined to vote on the 
renewal pending the results of the Board’s hearing related to the alleged COVID-19 guidance 
violations.  Id. ¶ 101.  On February 8, 2021, the Town Administrator submitted findings to the 
Board, prepared by Corbo, and such findings were sent to Plaintiffs on February 11, 2021.  Id. ¶ 
102.  The Board scheduled a public hearing for February 16, 2021.  Id.  Then, a public hearing was 
scheduled for March 21, 2021 but continued while the Board sought advice regarding potential 
conflicts of interest that it believed were created by ongoing litigation between Plaintiffs and the 

Town, including this lawsuit.  D. 37 ¶ 105.  On April 23, 2021, Defendants’ counsel represented 
that the State Ethics Commission had cleared the Board for a public hearing on April 26, 2021, but 
Plaintiffs have not been provided with any written determination of same.  Id. ¶ 108.   
In advance of the April 26, 2021 hearing (and subsequent hearings), the Board allegedly 
refused to include certain documents and letters of support that Plaintiffs allege would refute the 
Town Administrator’s prior findings.  Id. ¶ 114.  During the hearing, the Board stated that they 
had discussed with each other and with Harwich residents ex parte concerning outdoor noise 
complaints at Plaintiffs’ restaurants, which was not previously disclosed to Plaintiffs.  Id. ¶ 115.  
The Police Chief similarly stated that he did not disclose any complaints he had received to 

Plaintiffs, but also did not refer any such complaints to the Board as Ordinance violations.  Id.  The 
Board then renewed Ember’s liquor and entertainment licenses but imposed an acoustic-only 
restriction on Ember’s entertainment license.  Id. ¶ 116.  On April 27, 2021, the Board held a public 
meeting where it revoked The Port’s expanded outdoor dining permit, and Plaintiffs allege that the 
Board denied Plaintiffs’ counsel the chance to meaningfully cross-examine adverse witnesses and 
refused  to  consider  the  full  extent  of  Plaintiffs’  proposed  designs  and  improvements  to 
accommodate its expanded outdoor dining.  Id. ¶ 117.  As a result of the revocation, The Port lost 
the deposit on its tent and had to refund deposits for six wedding reception reservations.  Id. ¶ 118.  
On May 10, 2021, the Board imposed the same acoustic-only restriction on The Port’s 2021 
entertainment license but did not impose the same on Perks despite Perks’ two violations of the 
Ordinance in 2019.  Id. ¶ 120.  On May 12, 2021, the Board renewed The Port’s liquor license, but 
suspended it for three days as discipline for the COVID-19 violations articulated in the Board’s 
February findings.  Id. ¶ 121.                                            
IV.  Procedural History                                                   

Plaintiffs instituted this lawsuit on March 19, 2021.  D. 1.  Plaintiffs then moved for a 
preliminary injunction.  D. 7.  After the Court heard the parties on that motion, D. 31, the Court 
requested additional briefing from the parties on whether abstention from granting injunctive relief 
was required in light of ongoing state proceedings between the parties, D. 32.  Before such briefing 
was complete, Plaintiffs amended their complaint.3  D. 37.  The Town and Sluis have now moved 
to dismiss.  D. 58; D. 60.  The Court heard the parties on the pending motions and took this matter 
under advisement.  D. 72.                                                 
V.   Discussion                                                           
A.   Constitutional Claims (Count I)                                 
Plaintiffs assert Count I against all Defendants for alleged violations of their First and 

Fourteenth Amendment rights, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. §§ 19834 and 1985.5    


3 The injunctive relief Plaintiffs originally requested, that the Town reinstate Plaintiffs’ licenses 
for summer 2021, D. 7, is now moot in light of the Town granting the licenses, see D. 37 ¶¶ 116, 
120-21, and to the extent that it seeks other relief, D. 7 at 15, it is denied as moot in light on this 
ruling on the motions to dismiss.                                         
4 Plaintiffs cannot assert a § 1983 claim against Sluis where the amended complaint does not 
plausibly allege that Sluis, a fellow restaurant owner and private citizen, acted “under color of 
law.”  See Davignon v. Hodgson, 524 F.3d 91, 112 (1st Cir. 2008).         
5 To the extent Plaintiffs continue to press their § 1985 claim, see D. 65, they fail to state a claim 
because “a plaintiff may recover only when the conspiratorial conduct of which he complains is 
propelled by some racial, or perhaps otherwise class-based, invidiously discriminatory animus,” 
Perkins v. City of Attleboro, 969 F. Supp. 2d 158, 178 (D. Mass. 2013) (quoting Aulson v. 
     1.   First Amendment                                            

Plaintiffs allege that the Ordinance violates their First Amendment rights because it is 
overly broad and impermissibly vague.  D. 37 ¶¶ 143-45; D. 65 at 8.  To the extent Plaintiffs seek 
to mount a facial challenge to the Ordinance, they have failed to allege one.  “In the First 
Amendment context . . . a law may be invalidated as overbroad if a substantial number of its 
applications are unconstitutional, judged in relation to the statute’s plainly legitimate sweep.”  
United States v. Stevens, 559 U.S. 460, 473 (2010) (internal citation and quotation marks omitted).  
Here, Plaintiffs make no argument as to the constitutionality of any other application of the 
Ordinance, and thus have not plausibly alleged that the Ordinance is facially unconstitutional for 
its overbreadth.6  See Project Veritas Action Fund v. Rollins, 982 F.3d 813, 841 (1st Cir. 2020) 
(affirming dismissal where plaintiff did not point to other unconstitutional applications of statute). 
In assessing Plaintiffs’ challenge to the Ordinance as it applies to them, the Court first 
considers the appropriate level of scrutiny, which “turns on whether the restriction is content-based 
or content-neutral.”  Martin v. Evans, 241 F. Supp. 3d 276, 287 (D. Mass. 2017) (citing Rideout 

v. Gardner, 838 F.3d 65, 71 (1st Cir. 2016)).  Here, the Court applies intermediate scrutiny.  The 
Ordinance is content-neutral as it regulates noise regardless of the underlying content of the noise 
(i.e., the message conveyed or the purpose of same).  See March v. Mills, 867 F.3d 46, 55-56, 64 
(1st Cir. 2017) ( applying intermediate scrutiny and noting “it is well established that, even in 

Blanchard, 83 F.3d 1, 3 (1st Cir. 1996)), and here Plaintiffs do not allege racial or class-based 
discrimination.                                                           
6 Plaintiffs instead assert that the Ordinance is overbroad because a business violates it “merely by 
operating, even without music, amplified or otherwise, as patron noise emanating from their 
outdoor patios is ‘plainly audible’ at distances greater than 150 feet from the establishment,” and 
that the Ordinance “constitutes a complete ban on the use of amplified sound for any form of 
speech.”  D. 65 at 9.  Even if this assertion were relevant to the overbreadth inquiry articulated 
above, there is no allegation in the amended complaint to support such an assertion.  See D. 37 ¶ 
96.                                                                       
public places, the government may enforce reasonable restrictions on the time, place, or manner 
of speech in order to protect persons from unduly burdensome noise”).  Under intermediate 
scrutiny, the law must be “narrowly tailored to serve a significant governmental interest,” but 
“need not be the least restrictive or least intrusive means of serving the government’s interests.”  
Rideout, 838 F.3d at 71–72 (quoting Ward v. Rock Against Racism, 491 U.S. 781, 791 (1989)); 

McCullen v. Coakley, 573 U.S. 464, 486 (2014)) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
The Supreme Court has held that governments have a “substantial interest in protecting its 
citizens from unwelcome noise . . . [which includes] even such traditional public forums as city 
streets and parks from excessive noise.”  Ward, 491 U.S. at 796 (citations omitted).  Turning to 
the  narrow  tailoring  requirement,  such  consideration  “is  satisfied  as  long  as  the  particular 
regulation promotes a substantial government interest that would be achieved less effectively 
absent the regulation,” Knights of Columbus, Council No. 94 v. Town of Lexington, 272 F.3d 25, 
33 (1st Cir. 2001) (internal citation omitted).  Here, the substantial government interest in abating 
noise would be less effective in the absence of the Ordinance and it likewise leaves open alternative 

channels of communication because it does not prohibit all noise or music, just that which it defines 
as excessive.  In the context of music, at issue here, an individual or business may turn their outdoor 
music down or play music inside to not run afoul of the Ordinance.  See March, 867 F.3d at 68–
69.    Plaintiffs  assert  that  the  Ordinance  “does  not  leave  open  alternative  channels  of 
communication because music is ‘plainly audible’ at distances of more than 150 feet, whether 
amplified or not,” D. 65 at 10, but have not alleged any facts as to this assertion.   
To the extent Plaintiffs argue that the Ordinance fails intermediate scrutiny because it is 
vague, see id., they have also not plausibly alleged any facts as to same.7  Here, the Ordinance 
proscribes noise that is “plainly audible” to a listener at 150 feet, and Plaintiffs have not alleged 
any facts that challenge the objectiveness of this measure.8  Moreover, similar measures of 
excessive noise in municipal ordinances have been upheld and Plaintiffs do not contend with these 

arguments beyond their own interpretation of the Ordinance’s definitions.  See Kovacs v. Cooper, 
336 U.S. 77, 79 (1949) (holding that “loud and raucous,” while “abstract” had “through daily use 
acquired a content that conveys to any interested person a sufficiently accurate concept of what is 
forbidden”); March, 867 F.3d at 67 (rejecting argument that lack of specific decibel level in statute 
made it overly broad when statute proscribed excessive noise that could be “heard within a 
building”); Abrami v. Town of Amherst, No. 09-cv-30176-DPW, 2013 WL 3777070, at *15 (D. 
Mass.  July  16,  2013)  (concluding  that  noise  ordinance  specifying  decibel  levels  was  not 
constitutionally required, even if ordinance could include such measure and be written more 
precisely).                                                               

Accordingly, Plaintiffs have not plausibly stated a First Amendment claim. 
     2.   Fourteenth Amendment                                       

Defendants next argue that Plaintiffs have failed to allege procedural and substantive due 
process claims.  D. 59 at 11-14.  Plaintiffs contend that the Town violated their due process rights 
by unlawfully delaying renewal of their liquor and entertainment licenses.  D. 65 at 12. 

7 A law may be “void for vagueness if its prohibitions are not clearly defined,” thus violating due 
process.  Grayned v. City of Rockford, 408 U.S. 104, 108 (1972).          
8 For support, Plaintiffs point to cautionary language from the Attorney General’s review of the 
Ordinance, but that language pertains to a different subsection, dealing with “special permits,” and 
is not related to the relevant portion of the Ordinance at issue here.  See D. 37-4 at 3. 
          a)   Substantive Due Process                               
“To establish a substantive due process claim, a plaintiff must demonstrate an ‘abuse of 
government power that shocks the conscience’ or ‘action that is legally irrational in that it is not 
sufficiently keyed to any legitimate state interests.’”  Coll. Hill Properties, LLC v. City of 
Worcester, 135 F. Supp. 3d 10, 15 (D. Mass. 2015), aff’d, 821 F.3d 193 (1st Cir. 2016) (quoting 

Collins v. Nuzzo, 244 F.3d 246, 250 (1st Cir. 2001)).  Although the First Circuit routinely rejects 
substantive due process claims in the context of local licensing decisions, “it has ‘left the door 
slightly ajar for federal relief in truly horrendous situations.’”  Brockton Power LLC v. City of 
Brockton, 948 F. Supp. 2d 48, 69 (D. Mass. 2013) (internal citation omitted); Pagan v. Calderon, 
448 F.3d 16, 33 (1st Cir. 2006) (noting that the First Circuit has “held, with a regularity bordering 
on the monotonous, that the substantive due process doctrine may not, in the ordinary course, be 
invoked  to  challenge  discretionary  permitting  or  licensing  determinations  of  state  or  local 
decisionmakers, whether those decisions are right or wrong”).  The Town’s acts therefore “must 
be ‘truly outrageous, uncivilized, and intolerable,’ . . . and ‘the requisite arbitrariness and caprice 

must be stunning, evidencing more than humdrum legal error.’”  Harron v. Town of Franklin, 660 
F.3d 531, 536 (1st Cir. 2011) (internal citation omitted).  The “test is primarily concerned with 
violations of personal rights so severe[,] so disproportionate to the need presented, and so inspired 
by malice or sadism rather than a merely careless or unwise excess of zeal that it amounted to a 
brutal and inhumane abuse of official power literally shocking to the conscience.”  Id. (internal 
citation omitted).  Moreover, “any permit or license denial, no matter how unattractive, that falls 
short of being ‘truly horrendous’ is unlikely to qualify as conscience-shocking.”  Id. (quotation 
omitted) (affirming dismissal where allegations that Town and officials sought to put tavern out 
of business by denying liquor license were conclusory).                   
Accordingly, Plaintiffs must allege conduct that is “truly horrendous,” which here they 
have not.  See Harron, 660 F. 3d at 536.  Even as alleged, Plaintiffs describe, at best, animosity 
between them, their competitors, and the Town, but no conduct that could meet the high bar 
required here.  For example, Plaintiffs state that Plaintiff Brackett was not considered for a position 
on the now-disbanded ad-hoc noise committee but fail to allege that the committee took any action 

against Plaintiffs.  See D. 37 ¶ 37.  Plaintiffs also assert, in conclusory fashion, that the noise 
complaints and subsequent investigation into and discipline for same were biased and erroneous, 
see id. ¶¶ 69-79, but the amended complaint does not allege any specific facts as to these 
complaints or investigations into same such that the Court can infer the unlawful conduct asserted 
here.  Moreover, Plaintiffs’ licenses were eventually granted in April and May, despite allegedly 
improper delay.  Id. ¶ 116, 120-21.  To the extent that such delay was in violation of state law, 
even that cannot sustain a claim for conscience-shocking conduct.  See Baker v. Coxe, 940 F. 
Supp. 409, 415-16 (D. Mass. 1996), aff’d, 230 F.3d 470 (1st Cir. 2000) (noting “[i]t is not enough 
to show that [board] ‘exceeded, abused or ‘distorted’ its legal authority’”). 

          b)   Procedural Due Process                                
The Court does not read Plaintiffs’ opposition to address Defendants’ procedural due 
process arguments, see D. 65 at 12-18, but briefly addresses them for the sake of completeness.  
To plausibly allege a procedural due process claim, Plaintiffs “must identify a protected liberty or 
property interest and allege that the defendants, acting under color of state law, deprived [them] of 
that interest without constitutionally adequate process.”  González-Droz v. González-Colón, 660 
F.3d 1, 13 (1st Cir. 2011) (internal citation and quotation marks omitted).  For such claim, Plaintiffs 
would also need to show that Massachusetts law did not provide them with an adequate post-
deprivation remedy.  Hadfield v. McDonough, 407 F.3d 11, 21 (1st Cir. 2005).  “Post-deprivation 
remedies have been deemed sufficient (and fatal to a procedural due process claim) even where 
‘relief might be delayed, and damages are unavailable.’”  Brockton Power LLC, 948 F. Supp. 2d 
at 67 (quoting Licari v. Ferruzzi, 22 F.3d 344, 348 (1st Cir. 1994)).  Here, Plaintiffs have availed 
themselves of post-deprivation remedies provided by statute, bringing multiple state court lawsuits 
following the Board’s delay in renewing the licenses (pursuant to Mass. Gen. L. c. 249, § 4) and 

filed an appeal with the ABCC regarding same (pursuant to Mass. Gen. L. c. 138, § 67).  See 
Burnham v. City of Salem, Mass., 101 F. Supp. 2d 26, 35 (D. Mass. 2000) (noting that “[s]hould 
any doubt exist as to the adequacies of Massachusetts’ post-deprivation remedies, it is answered 
by” Massachusetts law providing for an appeal, “to which [plaintiff] in fact appealed”). 
          c)   Equal Protection                                      
Plaintiffs assert an equal protection claim, premised on a “class of one” theory, alleging 
that the Town treated other restaurants on more favorable terms.  See D. 65 at 18; Rectrix 
Aerodome Centers, Inc. v. Barnstable Mun. Airport Comm’n, 632 F. Supp. 2d 120, 128 (D. Mass. 
2009), aff’d, 610 F.3d 8 (1st Cir. 2010).  A class of one equal protection claim is “cognizable 

when—and only when—a ‘plaintiff alleges that she has been intentionally treated differently from 
others similarly situated and that there is no rational basis for the difference in treatment.’”  Cordi-
Allen v. Conlon, 494 F.3d 245, 250 (1st Cir. 2007) (quoting Vill. of Willowbrook v. Olech, 528 
U.S. 562, 564 (2000) (per curiam)).  Therefore, Plaintiffs must “identify and relate specific 
instances where persons situated similarly in all relevant aspects were treated differently, instances 
which have the capacity to demonstrate that [plaintiffs] were singled . . . out for unlawful 
oppression.”  Buchanan v. Maine, 469 F.3d 158, 178 (1st Cir. 2006) (citation and internal quotation 
marks omitted) (alteration in original).                                  
Here, Plaintiffs have failed to allege sufficient facts about other restaurants to show that 
they were similarly situated, either as an establishment, as to complaints that had been filed against 
them, or as to how the Town treated them.  Plaintiffs merely list other licensed establishments in 
the Town that allegedly faced no discipline for similar conduct, but do not allege any facts about 
these businesses size and structure, whether residents had reported violations to the Harwich Police 

regarding noise or COVID-19 guidance, previous violations (save for Perks), or the specific 
circumstances of the alleged violations charged to each establishment, if any.  See D. 37 ¶ 77 
(listing  other  businesses  and  lack  of  discipline),  ¶  91  (noting  that  Perks  received  one  day 
suspension of entertainment license but admitting that it had only two confirmed Ordinance 
violations in 2019 and not providing details of prior discipline served), ¶ 96 (asserting that other 
establishments had their licenses renewed in February 2021 but not naming any except Perks); 
Clark v. Boscher, 514 F.3d 107, 114 (1st Cir. 2008) (affirming dismissal of equal protection claim 
brought by developers of residential subdivision dismissed where developers presented the court 
multitude  of  different  types  of  allegedly  comparable  developments  because  they  were  not 

objectively similar in “all relevant respects”); Najas Realty, LLC v. Seekonk Water Dist., 68 F. 
Supp. 3d 246, 257 (D. Mass. 2014), aff’d, 821 F.3d 134 (1st Cir. 2016) (dismissing equal protection 
claim where complaint did not include “facts from which the court [could] determine whether 
these alleged ‘comparables’ are in any way similar to the plaintiffs’”).  As such, Plaintiffs’ 
allegations, even assumed to be true, do not plausibly allege comparators, a necessary predicate 
for this type of equal protection claim.                                  
Accordingly, Plaintiffs have not plausibly stated Fourteenth Amendment claims.9 


9 To the extent that the Town also moves to dismiss the constitutional claims on qualified immunity 
grounds, see D. 59 at 17-19, the Court need not reach the issue in light of its dismissal on other 
grounds.                                                                  
B.   MCRA Claims (Count II)                                          
Defendants argue that the MCRA claims should be dismissed because there is no allegation 
that they acted through threats, intimidation or coercion.  D. 59 at 22.  “To establish a claim under 
the [MCRA], the plaintiffs must prove that (1) their exercise or enjoyment of rights secured by the 
Constitution or laws of either the United States or of the Commonwealth, (2) have been interfered 

with, or attempted to be interfered with, and (3) that the interference or attempted interference was 
by threats, intimidation or coercion.”  Swanset Dev. Corp. v. City of Taunton, 423 Mass. 390, 395 
(1996) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted) (citing Mass. Gen. L. c. 12, § 11I).  “‘Threat’ 
in this context involves the intentional exertion of pressure to make another fearful or apprehensive 
of injury or harm.”  Planned Parenthood League of Massachusetts. Inc. v. Blake, 417 Mass. 467, 
474 (1994) (citations omitted).  “Intimidation,” meanwhile, “involves putting in fear for the 
purpose of compelling or deterring conduct.”  Id.    Finally, “coercion” amounts to “the use of 
physical or moral force to compel [another] to act or assent.”  Freeman v. Planning Bd. of W. 
Boylston, 419 Mass. 548, 565 (1995).  Here, the complaint is devoid of specific allegations as to 

Plaintiffs’ fear of harm, or fear such that they felt compelled or deterred from any conduct, or that 
Defendants exhibited any use of force.  Instead, the complaint contains conclusory assertions that 
Plaintiffs were subjected to allegedly wrongful conduct here, which is itself insufficient to support 
the MCRA claim.  See, e.g., D. 37 ¶¶ 125, 150; Longval v. Comm’r of Correction, 404 Mass. 325, 
333 (1989) (noting that “[a] direct violation of a person’s rights does not by itself involve threats, 
intimidation, or coercion and thus does not implicate the [MCRA]”).       
Accordingly, Plaintiffs have failed to state a claim for violation of the MCRA. 
C.   Massachusetts Declaration of Rights (Count III)                 

Defendants argue that the Court should dismiss Count III, which alleges a deprivation of 
rights guaranteed by the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights in the Massachusetts Constitution 
because there is no provide right of action for violations of these rights.  D. 59 at 23.  It is generally 
accepted that MCRA “occup[ies] the field” under most circumstances, Martino v. Hogan, 37 Mass. 
App. Ct. 710, 720 (1994), leaving no other recourse for an individual to assert a state constitutional 
claim against a state actor.  The Supreme Judicial Court has noted in dicta that “a person whose 
constitutional rights have been interfered with may be entitled to judicial relief even in the absence 
of a statute providing a procedural vehicle for obtaining relief.”  Phillips v. Youth Dev. Program, 
Inc., 390 Mass. 652, 657–58 (1983); see also Layne v. Superintendent, Mass. Corr. Inst., Cedar 
Junction, 406 Mass. 156, 159–60 (1989) (finding constitutional claim moot, but noting that “a 
State may not violate a person’s constitutional rights and then fairly assert that no redress can be 
had because the State has not provided a statutory means of enforcing those rights”).  In addition, 
“[a]t least one justice of the Superior Court has also indicated that claims brought directly under 

the Declaration of Rights should be permitted.”  Parsons ex rel. Parsons v. Town of Tewksbury, 
No. 09–1595, 2010 WL 1544470, at *5 (Mass. Super. Jan. 19, 2010) (citing McClure v. East 
Brookfield, No. 97–2004, 1999 WL 1323628, at *2 (Mass. Super. Mar. 11, 1999)).  The dicta in 
Layne, however, and those cases citing it aim to address harms that have no statutory redress.  
Here, the MCRA provides a means to sue a state actor for constitutional violations, provided that 
the actor uses threats, intimidation or coercion. See Grubba v. Bay State Abrasives, Div. of Dresser 
Indus., Inc., 803 F.2d 746, 748 (1st Cir. 1986) (noting that the MCRA was “a fully adequate 
procedural vehicle” to redress constitutional deprivations); see also Pimentel v. City of Methuen, 
323 F. Supp. 3d 255, 274 (D. Mass. 2018) (denying right of action for same reasons and noting 
that “[n]o Massachusetts appellate court, in the 35 years since Phillips, has ever held that such a 
right exists”).                                                           
Accordingly, the Court allows the motion to dismiss as to Count III. 
D.   Interference with Contractual Relations (Count IV)              

To prevail on a claim for interference with contractual or economic relations, Plaintiffs 
must establish that:  “(1) [they] had a contract with a third party; (2) the defendant knowingly 
induced the third party to break that contract; (3) the defendant’s interference, in addition to being 
intentional, was improper in motive or means; and (4) [Plaintiffs were] harmed by the defendant’s 
actions.”  Psy-Ed Corp. v. Klein, 459 Mass. 697, 715–16 (2011) (citation omitted).  Plaintiffs point 
to three instances of such interference:  the loss of The Port’s chef, the loss of its outdoor tent 
deposit, and the loss of wedding reception deposits.  D. 65 at 26.  Here, Plaintiffs fail to allege that 
Defendants were aware of any of these relationships or that Defendants knowingly induced these 
third parties to break their agreements.  As to loss of the chef, the Court is unable to discern what 
specific intentional interference allegedly occurred as Plaintiffs allege only that the “loss of their 

chef  and  other  valuable  employees”  was  caused  by  Defendants’  “disparate  treatment  and 
defamatory statements.”  See D. 37 ¶ 124.  As to Plaintiffs’ assertion that they lost their tent deposit 
and deposits on wedding reservations, there is likewise no allegation that the Town was aware of 
such contracts, or that the Town intentionally interfered with them.  See D. 37 ¶ 118.  Accordingly, 
Count IV fails to state a claim.                                          
E.   Common Law Conspiracy (Count V)                                 
“Two types of civil conspiracy exist under Massachusetts law.  The first ‘requires proof of 
coercion; the second requires proof of a common plan to commit a tortious act.’”  Fiorillo v. 
Winiker, 85 F. Supp. 3d 565, 576 (D. Mass. 2015) (quoting Kurker v. Hill, 44 Mass. App. Ct. 184, 
188 (1998)).  “Under the first type of conspiracy, a plaintiff ‘must allege that defendants, acting in 
unison, had some peculiar power of coercion over plaintiff that they would not have had if they 
had been acting independently.’”  Id.  (internal citation omitted).  “For the second type of 
conspiracy, the plaintiff must allege ‘first, a common design or an agreement, although not 
necessarily express, between two or more persons to do a wrongful act and, second, proof of some 

tortious act in furtherance of the agreement.’”  Id. (internal citation omitted).  Plaintiffs have failed 
to allege either form of civil conspiracy.  First, Plaintiffs do not allege that Defendants had 
“peculiar power of coercion” over them, but rather name individuals that “held a peculiar power 
of coercion of influence over the Board” to influence its decisions regarding Plaintiffs’ licenses.  
See D. 37 ¶ 149.  The complaint is otherwise devoid of any facts that allege coercion or control 
over Plaintiffs outside of the Board’s regular business of considering licenses and holding hearings 
for discipline on same.  See Massachusetts Laborers’ Health & Welfare Fund v. Philip Morris, 
Inc., 62 F. Supp. 2d 236, 244 (D. Mass. 1999) (noting that first type of civil conspiracy applies to 
“remedy direct economic coercion”).  Second, there is no plausible allegation of tortious acts 

committed by these named individuals in furtherance of any agreement.  The only tort alleged 
here, as discussed above, fails to state a claim.  Plaintiffs point to anonymous social media accounts 
and internal non-public memoranda of the Town to argue that “a reasonable person might draw an 
inference of a common plan to commit, assist or encourage a tortious act on the part of two or 
more defendants.”  D. 65 at 27.  That argument, however, overlooks the need for an “underlying 
tortious conduct for which liability can be assigned,” and here there is no such conduct and no 
nexus to individuals for same.  See Massachusetts Laborers’ Health & Welfare Fund, 62 F. Supp. 
2d at 244.                                                                
F.   Defamation (Count VI)                                           
“To prevail on a defamation claim, a plaintiff must ‘establish that the defendants published 
a false statement about him to a third party that either caused him economic loss or was the type 
that is actionable without proof of economic loss.’” Driscoll v. Bd. of Trs. of Milton Acad., 70 
Mass. App. Ct. 285, 295-96 (2007) (quoting Phelan v. May Dept. Stores Co., 443 Mass. 52, 55-56 

(2004)).  Relevant here, Plaintiffs identify two alleged instances of defamation.  First, Plaintiffs 
allege that Sluis falsely reported to Harwich Police that Plaintiffs violated COVID-19 guidance.  
D. 37 ¶ 195.  Second, Plaintiffs allege that Ballantine made a defamatory statement to the Cape 
Cod Times, where he stated with regard to Plaintiffs’ alleged violations of the guidance, “Our 
feeling is this was very flagrant. They ignored the whole of COVID-19 regulations.”  Id. ¶ 197.10 
Plaintiffs have failed to state a defamation claim against Sluis.  “To properly allege 
defamation, a plaintiff must specifically identify the allegedly false statement,” and “allegation[s] 
that the defendant made statements that ‘cast the plaintiff in a negative light,’ but that does not 
identify a specific statement, is not sufficient.”  Kelleher v. Lowell Gen. Hosp., 98 Mass. App. Ct. 

49, 53 n.2 (2020) (citation omitted).  Here, the single paragraph in the amended complaint that 
mentions Sluis’ call to Harwich Police does not identify the objectionable statement, or any details 
about same such that the Court could assess the truth or falsity of the statement.11  See D. 37 ¶ 195; 


10 Plaintiffs suggest that the statements are defamation per se because they accuse Plaintiffs of 
committing a crime, see D. 65 at 28, but even as alleged these instances refer to alleged violations 
of state and local COVID-19 guidance for restaurants, not criminal laws.  
11 Plaintiffs have included the purported transcript of Sluis’s call to Harwich police in the text of 
their opposition.  The Court, however, “may not consider any documents that are outside of the 
complaint, or not expressly incorporated therein, unless the motion is converted into one for 
summary judgment,” and Plaintiffs have not argued that they meet one of the limited exceptions 
to this rule.  See Alternative Energy, Inc. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 267 F.3d 30, 33 (1st 
Cir. 2001).                                                               
Piccone v. Bartels, 785 F.3d 766, 772 (1st Cir. 2015) (explaining that court’s inquiry as to 
verifiable facts requires consideration of the “specific challenged statements” made).  
As to Ballantine, Defendants argue that the statement is conditionally privileged.  D. 59 at 
28.  “Statements made by public officials while performing their official duties are conditionally 
privileged [because] threat of defamation suits may deter public officials from complying with 

their official duties when those duties include the need to make statements on important public 
issues.”  Barrows v. Wareham Fire Dist., 82 Mass. App. Ct. 623, 630–31 (2012) (quoting Mulgrew 
v. Taunton, 410 Mass. 631, 635 (1991)).  Here, Ballantine commented to the newspaper, identified 
as Chair of the Board, discussing ongoing matters related to a public Board hearing, and regarding 
Plaintiffs’ compliance with COVID-19 restrictions subject to discussion at same.   D. 37-27 at 1-
2.  Plaintiffs do not contend with this argument but note that “despite the qualified privilege” it 
can be lost by a showing that Ballantine abused the privilege, such as “publication with knowledge 
of falsity or with reckless disregard of the truth.”  See D. 65 at 28-30; Barrows, 82 Mass. App. Ct. 
at 631.  Plaintiffs do not specify how Ballantine knew the statement was false or that he acted with 

reckless disregard.  See D. 65 at 30.  In their amended complaint, Plaintiffs assert that Ballantine 
“kn[ew] that Meggan Eldredge, Harwich Health Agent, inspected and approved Ember’s and The 
Port’s operations as compliant with COVID-19 guidance, as such was required to permit each 
licensed establishment’s ‘outdoor’ operations.”  D. 37 ¶ 197.  Even if he did have knowledge of 
Eldredge’s inspection and approval of their operations plans, that does not speak to the subsequent 
alleged violations of the COVID-19 guidance described by Ballantine and under consideration by 
the Board for discipline.                                                 
For at least the reasons discussed above, Plaintiffs have failed to state a defamation claim 
against Sluis and Ballantine.                                             
VI.  Conclusion                                                           

For these reasons, the Court ALLOWS the motions to dismiss. 12       
So Ordered.                                                          

                                   /s/ Denise J. Casper              
                                   United States District Judge      














12 The Court also dismisses the amended complaint against Does 1-10.  To sue an unidentified 
party, a plaintiff must “show that ‘a good-faith investigation has failed to reveal the identity of the 
relevant  defendant  and  there  is  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  discovery  will  provide  that 
information.’”  Rodriguez-Reyes v. Molina-Rodriguez, 711 F.3d 49, 58 n.6 (1st Cir. 2013) 
(quoting Martínez–Rivera v. Sánchez Ramos, 498 F.3d 3, 8 (1st Cir. 2007)).  As alleged, Plaintiffs’ 
amended complaint offers no information to assess same.  See D. 37 ¶ 32 (alleging only that Does 
1-10 “are individuals whose actual names remain unknown after completion of a reasonable and 
diligent search”); Messere v. Clarke, No. 11-cv-11705-MLW, 2015 WL 5609959, at *14 (D. Mass. 
Sept. 22, 2015) (dismissing Doe defendants for same).