UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                             
          FOR THE DISTRICT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE                          

Robert Arias                                                              

v.                            Civil No. 17-cv-516-LM                 
                              Opinion No. 2023 DNH 076 P             
Noah A. Herzon, et al.                                                    

                       O R D E R                                     
Plaintiff Robert Arias alleges that several Drug Enforcement Administration 
(“DEA”) agents used excessive force on him (or failed to intervene against other 
agents’ use of excessive force) when they arrested him in September 2016.  Arias’s 
claims arise under the Fourth Amendment.  He seeks damages from the defendants 
under Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents of Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 403 
U.S. 388 (1971).                                                          
Defendants move for summary judgment (doc. no. 66).  They rely on recent 
Supreme Court precedent, Egbert v. Boule, --- U.S. ---, 142 S. Ct. 1793 (2022), that 
strictly limits the applicability of Bivens outside of its original “context.”  
Defendants contend that Arias’s excessive force and failure-to-intervene claims seek 
to apply Bivens to a new context.  Arias disagrees and contends that both claims 
survive summary judgment because they “fall within the ambit of Bivens.”  
For the reasons that follow, the court agrees with defendants and grants 

their motion for summary judgment.                                        
                 STANDARD OF REVIEW                                  
Summary judgment is proper only if the moving party can demonstrate that 
there is no evidence in the record to support a judgment for the nonmoving party. 
Borges v. Serrano-Isern, 605 F.3d 1, 5, 8 (1st Cir. 2010); see also Fed. R. Civ. P. 

56(a).  In evaluating a motion for summary judgment, the courts must view the 
evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, must draw all 
reasonable inferences in that party’s favor, and may neither make credibility 
determinations nor weigh the evidence.  Harris v. Scarcelli, 835 F.3d 24, 29 (1st Cir. 
2016); Hicks v. Johnson, 755 F.3d 738, 743 (1st Cir. 2014).               

                    BACKGROUND                                       
The following facts are drawn from the court’s (McAuliffe, J.) first summary 
judgment order (doc. no. 56).  They are uncontested for purposes of the issue before 
the court.                                                                
Law enforcement officers investigating drug trafficking made several 

controlled purchases of fentanyl-laced heroin from Arias.  On September 8, 2016, 
the 6 named defendants1and 12 other federal law enforcement officers arrested 
Arias.  Arias’s arrest was authorized by an arrest warrant.  All of the defendants 
are either DEA agents or local police officers assigned to a DEA task force. 
The arrest occurred at the parking lot of the Rockingham Park Mall in 
Salem, New Hampshire.  Arias arrived at the mall in a car driven by his pregnant 


1 The court previously granted summary judgment in favor of two of the six 
defendants, so only four officers remain in this case.  See doc. no. 56   
wife, Carmen Jose.  Arias sat in the front passenger seat.  Carmen Jose pulled the 
car into a parking spot.  Several police cars pulled in, blocking Arias’s car into the 
spot.  Seeing that she had nowhere to move the car, Carmen Jose put the car into 

park.  The officers, many in plain clothes, approached the car with their weapons 
drawn.                                                                    
The officers tried to remove Arias from the car, but he was wearing a 
seatbelt.  An officer cut Arias’s seatbelt and dragged him from the car, took him to 
the ground, and handcuffed him.  Both Arias and Carmen Jose complied with all of 
the officers’ commands.  The officers stated in affidavits that the arrest was quick 
and nonviolent.  They say that Arias suffered no injuries of significance.   

By contrast, Arias stated in an affidavit that the officers dragged him from 
the car by his neck.  Once the officers had Arias on the ground, they handcuffed 
him, stepped on his legs, and hit his head against the ground.  Arias involuntarily 
urinated in his pants because of the fear the officers caused him.  At some point, 
Arias lost consciousness.  Carmen Jose recounted a similar version of events in her 
affidavit.                                                                

Arias brought this suit in 2017.  He alleges that the arresting officers used 
excessive force against him in violation of the Fourth Amendment.  He alleges that 
the officers who watched his violent arrest but failed to protect him also violated the 
Fourth Amendment.                                                         
Arias seeks money damages for the alleged physical and emotional injuries 
that he suffered.  In January 2021, this court (McAuliffe, J.) denied defendants’ 
motion for summary judgment on the ground of qualified immunity.  Defendants 
filed this second motion for summary judgment after the Supreme Court’s decision 
in Egbert v. Boule.                                                       

                     DISCUSSION                                      
Relying on Egbert, defendants argue that the court must dismiss Arias’s 
claims for excessive force and failure to intervene in the use of excessive force 
because this case applies Bivens in a “new context.”  Arias responds that the 

circumstances of his claims are, in all material respects, like those of Bivens.  After 
reviewing the applicable law, the court addresses Arias’s excessive-force claims first 
and his failure-to-intervene claims second.                               
The Fourth Amendment prohibits federal officers from using excessive force 
on arrestees.  E.g., Miranda-Rivera v. Toledo-Davila, 813 F.3d 64, 70-71 (1st Cir. 
2016).  While 42 U.S.C. § 1983 permits plaintiffs to bring damages suits against 
state officials for constitutional violations, there is no analogous statutory cause of 

action for such suits against federal officials.  See Ziglar v. Abbasi, 582 U.S. 120, 
130-31 (2017).  Notwithstanding that absence of statutory authorization, the 
Supreme Court held in Bivens that an arrestee could bring a suit under the Fourth 
Amendment for damages from the federal officers who searched his home and 
arrested him, allegedly using excessive force in the process.  403 U.S. at 397.  
Subsequently, the Supreme Court recognized a similar “implied cause of action” 

under the constitution in two other suits seeking damages for alleged constitutional 
violations.  First, in Davis v. Passman, 442 U.S 228 (1979), the Court held that a 
former congressional staffer could bring a suit for damages against a United States 
Congressman for sex discrimination in violation of the Fifth Amendment.  Then, in 
Carlson v. Green, 446 U.S. 14 (1980), the Court held that a deceased federal 

inmate’s estate could bring a suit for damages against prison officials for their 
failure to provide the inmate adequate medical treatment in violation of the Eighth 
Amendment.                                                                
But since deciding Carlson, the Supreme Court has “consistently refused” to 
extend Bivens despite numerous opportunities to do so.  See Abbasi, 582 U.S. at 
135; see also Drewniak v. U.S. CBP, 554 F. Supp. 3d 348, 355 (D.N.H. 2021) 
(collecting Supreme Court cases).  More recently, the Supreme Court “has scaled 

back Bivens significantly, delivering a trilogy of opinions expressing opposition 
toward any expansion of Bivens actions.”  See Bulger v. Hurwitz, 62 F.4th 127, 136 
(4th Cir. 2023) (citing Egbert, 142 S. Ct. at 1803, Hernandez v. Mesa, 589 U.S. ---, 
140 S. Ct. 735, 741 (2020), and Abbasi, 582 U.S. at 135).  This approach derives 
from the Court’s separation-of-powers concerns, as the Supreme Court has  
expressed its view that Congress—not the courts—should determine whether a 

private right of action for damages should exist for constitutional violations.  See 
Abbasi, 582 U.S. at 133-34 (“[I]t is a significant step under separation-of-powers 
principles for a court to determine that it has the authority, under the judicial 
power, to create and enforce a cause of action for damages against federal officials 
in order to remedy a constitutional violation.”).                         
At the same time, the Supreme Court has not overruled Bivens.  Egbert, 142 
S. Ct. at 1803 (“[R]ather than dispense with Bivens altogether, we have emphasized 
that recognizing a cause of action under Bivens is ‘a disfavored judicial activity.’”).  

Instead, the Supreme Court has imposed “a highly restrictive two-step analysis,” 
which limits when claims for damages against federal officers may proceed.  Bulger, 
62 F.4th at 136-37.                                                       
Under the first step, the court must determine whether the claim seeks to 
apply Bivens in a “new context” or involves a “new category of defendant.”  Id. at 
137 (quoting Hernandez, 140 S. Ct. at 743).  A case presents “a new Bivens context” 
if it is “meaningfully” different from all three cases in which the Supreme Court has 

authorized damages claims against federal officers for constitutional violations.  
Egbert, 142 S. Ct. at 1803; Bulger, 62 F.4th at 137.  Meaningful differences may 
include:                                                                  
     the rank of the officers involved; the constitutional right at  
     issue; the generality or specificity of the official action; the 
     extent  of judicial  guidance  as to  how  an  officer  should  
     respond to the problem or emergency to be confronted; the       
     statutory or other legal mandate under which the officer        
     was  operating;  the  risk  of  disruptive  intrusion  by  the  
     Judiciary  into  the  function  of  other  branches;  or  the   
     presence  of  potential  special  factors  that                 
     previous Bivens cases did not consider.                         

Abbasi, 582 U.S. at 140 (emphasis added).  Thus, a meaningful difference from 
Bivens exists where a claim presents “special factors” which the Supreme Court did 
not consider in Bivens.  Id.  In Egbert, the Supreme Court made clear that an 
alternative remedial structure, created by either the Executive or by Congress, is 
one such “special factor” that courts must consider in making this determination.  
See 142 S. Ct. at 1806-07.  This followed from the Supreme Court’s earlier holdings 
that legislatively created comprehensive alternative remedies can make the 

“situation altogether different from Bivens.”  See Correctional Servs. Corp. v. 
Malesko, 534 U.S. 61, 73 (2001); Bush v. Lucas, 462 U.S. 367, 378, 385-86 (1983); 
see also Gonzalez v. Velez, 864 F.3d 45, 52-54 (1st Cir. 2017) (holding, in the 
alternative, that the existence of an “alternative process that Congress may have 
viewed as an equally effective surrogate for an action brought directly under the 
Constitution” forecloses relief under Bivens).                            
The court proceeds to the second step in the analysis if it determines that a 

meaningful difference exists.  At the second step, the court must dismiss the claim if 
there is “any rational reason (even one)” to think that either Congress or the 
Executive branch “is better suited” to determine whether a cause of action exists 
than the courts.  Egbert, 142 S. Ct. at 1803.  In Egbert, the Supreme Court 
acknowledged that the two-step analysis “often resolve[s] to a single question: 
whether there is any reason to think that Congress might be better equipped to 

create a damages remedy.”  Id.  And Egbert further clarified that the presence of an 
alternative remedial structure is a “special factor” counseling in favor of dismissal.  
See id. at 1806-07.                                                       
Thus, after Egbert, once a court determines that there is an alternative 
remedial structure that Bivens did not consider, the two-step framework collapses 
into one question:  Is there any reason to think that the Judiciary is better equipped 
than Congress or the Executive branches to augment that remedy?  Egbert, 142 S. 
Ct. at 1805.  The answer requires deference to the other branches and will likely 
always be answered in the negative.  As explained in Egbert: “[T]he question of 

whether a given remedy is adequate is a legislative determination that must be left 
to Congress, not the federal courts.  So long as Congress or the Executive has 
created a remedial process that it finds sufficient to secure an adequate level of 
deterrence, the courts cannot second-guess that calibration by superimposing a 
Bivens remedy.”  Id. at 1807.                                             
The parties agree that, of the three cases in which the Supreme Court has 
authorized damages causes of action against federal officers (Bivens, Carlson, and 

Davis), only Bivens itself is relevant here.  In Bivens, officers from the Federal 
Bureau of Narcotics2 entered Bivens’s apartment and arrested him for alleged 
narcotics crimes.  403 U.S. at 389.  Bivens alleged that the agents handcuffed him 
“in front of his wife and children, and threatened to arrest the entire family.”  Id.  
The officers searched the apartment, and they took Bivens to a federal courthouse, 
where he was interrogated, booked, and “subjected to a visual strip search.”  Id.  


2 The Supreme Court in Abbasi, 582 U.S. at 140, described Bivens as involving 
“a claim against FBI agents,” although Bivens involved agents from the Federal 
Bureau of Narcotics.  Bivens, 403 U.S. at 389 (“Petitioner’s complaint alleged that       
. . . agents of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics acting under claim of federal authority 
. . . .”); Bivens, 276 F. Supp. 12, 13 (E.D.N.Y. 1967) (quoting Bivens’s complaint as 
bringing claims against “six (6) Agents of the U.S. Narcotic Bureau”); Bivens, 456 
F.2d 1339, 1341 (2d Cir. 1972) (stating, on remand from Supreme Court, that “we 
must now decide the important and highly controversial question whether the acts of 
these Federal Bureau of Narcotics Agents are clothed with immunity . . . .”).  It is 
unclear why the Supreme Court in Abbasi described the defendants in Bivens as FBI 
agents.                                                                   
Bivens later brought suit against the arresting officers.  Id.  He alleged that the 
officers arrested him and searched his apartment without a warrant and without 
probable cause.  Id.  Additionally and separately, he alleged that the officers used 

unreasonable force when arresting him.  Id.  The Supreme Court held that Bivens 
could seek money damages against the officers for all those alleged violations of the 
Fourth Amendment, even though Congress had not expressly created a damages 
remedy by statute.  Id. at 397 (“[W]e hold that petitioner is entitled to recovery 
money damages for any injuries he has suffered as a result of the agents’ violation 
of the Amendment.”).                                                      
Despite its refusal to extend Bivens, the Court recognizes that Bivens is still 

good law.  Abbasi, 582 U.S. at 134.  In Abbasi, the Court explained that the “settled 
law of Bivens in this common and recurrent sphere of law enforcement, and the 
undoubted reliance upon it as a fixed principle in the law, are powerful reasons to 
retain it in that sphere.”  Id.                                           
Relying on Bivens, Arias brings two Fourth Amendment excessive force 
claims against the DEA agents who arrested him.  The first claim is brought 

against the officers who inflicted the excessive force, and the second is brought 
against the officers who failed to intervene to stop the excessive force.  Until Egbert, 
Arias’s first Bivens claim may have survived.  After Egbert, neither of his claims is 
viable.                                                                   
I.   Excessive Force                                                      

Defendants argue that Arias’s excessive-force claims are materially different 
from Bivens because (1) Arias was arrested pursuant to warrant in a parking lot 
while Bivens’s arrest occurred without a warrant in his home, and (2) the DEA has, 
like Border Patrol, an alternative remedial structure, a factor which was not 
considered in Bivens and was dispositive in Egbert.  Defendants’ second argument 
is persuasive.                                                            
Bivens and Arias’s claims share many of the same background facts: an 
arrest made by federal narcotics agents investigating a violation of federal drug 
laws that would have been routine but for the alleged constitutional violations.  

Whether the officers had a warrant for Arias’s arrest is not a meaningful difference 
from Bivens.  See Bueno Diaz v. Mercurio, 442 F. Supp. 3d 701, 708 (S.D.N.Y. 2020) 
(finding that plaintiff’s arrest pursuant to a warrant did not create a meaningful 
difference from Bivens when plaintiff alleged excessive force claims).  As discussed, 
Bivens involved two allegedly unlawful actions: a warrantless search and seizure 
and an arrest executed with excessive force, and it recognized the availability of 

damages for both violations.  See 403 U.S. at 389 (“[H]is complaint asserted that the 
arrest and search were effected without a warrant, and that unreasonable force was 
employed in making the arrest . . . .”).  The arresting officers’ possession of a 
warrant in this case is a difference from Bivens, but not one with meaning. 
Likewise, the court does not find persuasive defendants’ argument that this case is 
meaningfully different from Bivens because Bivens involved an arrest in the 
plaintiff’s home while this case involves an arrest in a parking lot.  These 
differences are illusory rather than meaningful.  See Abbasi, 582 U.S. at 149 
(acknowledging that some differences “will be so trivial that they will not suffice to 

create a new Bivens context”).  Furthermore, the category of defendants is 
effectively the same here as in Bivens.  In 1973, the functions of the Federal Bureau 
of Narcotics (the agency at issue in Bivens) were transferred to the DEA — the 
agency defendants work for in this case.3                                 
Here, however, the defendants also point to the DEA’s alternative remedial 
structures under the Inspector General Act of 1978, 5 U.S.C. chapter 4,4 and the 
Office of Professional Responsibility, 28 C.F.R. § 0.29c(c).  These processes allow 

individuals like Arias to file misconduct reports against DEA agents, which may 
then be investigated and remedied by the appropriate office.  Defendants contend 
that the Border Patrol’s similar administrative process was critical to the Supreme 
Court’s holding in Egbert that Bivens did not extend to a claim against a border 
patrol agent.  The court agrees that the existence of these alternative remedial 



3 Specifically, in 1968, the Bureau of Narcotics (which had been part of the 
Department of the Treasury) was abolished and its functions transferred to the newly 
established Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, part of the Department of 
Justice. See Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1968, 38 F.R. 15932, 1968-2 C.B. 907; 
United States v. Feola, 420 U.S. 671, 684 n.18 (1975).  Then, in 1973, the Bureau of 
Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs was abolished and its functions were transferred to 
the DEA.  See Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1973, 38 F.R. 15932, 87 Stat. 1091. 

4 The Inspector General Act was initially codified in an appendix to the U.S. 
code, 5 U.S.C.App. §§ 1 et seq.  Effective December 2022, Congress moved those 
provisions to 5 U.S.C. chapter 4.  Pub. L. 117-286, 136 Stat. 4196.       
structures is sufficient both to place Arias’s case in a new context and to preclude 
expansion of Bivens to that new context.                                  
In Abbasi, the Supreme Court stated that one reason to find a new context is 

the “presence of potential special factors that previous Bivens cases did not 
consider.”  582 U.S. at 140.  Then, in Egbert, the Supreme Court made clear that an 
alternative remedial structure is a “special factor” which courts must give 
heightened consideration.  See 142 S. Ct. at 1806-07.  In other words, the court—at 
either the first or second step of the Abbasi framework—cannot ignore the presence 
of special factors which were not considered in Bivens.  McGee v. Bureau of Prisons, 
No. CV 23-00190 LEK-KJM, 2023 WL 3467116, at *5 (D. Haw. May 15, 2023)    

(holding that BOP’s administrative remedial structure was not considered in 
Carlson and therefore presents a new context for this Bivens claim).      
The alternative remedial structure identified by the government applies to 
alleged misconduct by DEA agents and was created in 1978 – several years after the 
Supreme Court decided Bivens.  Therefore, it is a “special factor” which the 
Supreme Court did not consider in Bivens.  And the existence of a special factor like 

an alternative remedial structure is sufficient to place a case in a new context.5  See 
Abbasi, 582 U.S. at 140; Egbert, 142 S. Ct. at 1803.                      

5 The court need not analyze all of the features of the DEA’s alternative 
remedial structure.  In Egbert, the Supreme Court held that so long as Congress or 
the Executive created an alternative remedial process that it finds sufficient to secure 
an adequate level of deterrence, the courts cannot apply Bivens to federal agents 
covered by that process.  See 142 S. Ct. at 1806.  Arias has supplied no reason to 
distinguish the alternative remedial structures at issue here from the process at issue 
in Egbert, which the Supreme Court found to be sufficient to preclude application of 
In light of Egbert, the court is not persuaded to apply the approach to the 
two-step framework used in Aaron v. City of Lowell, --- F. Supp. 3d ---, No. 20-cv-
11604-ADB, 2023 WL 2743337, at *16 (D. Mass. Mar. 31, 2023), and Kennedy v. 

Massachusetts, No. 22-cv-11152, --- F. Supp. 3d ---, ---, 2022 WL 17343849, at *4 (D. 
Mass. Nov. 30, 2022).  Both cases hold that a court need not consider an alternative 
remedial structure unless it reaches the second step of the Abbasi framework.  
However, Abbasi states that courts must consider special factors which the 
Supreme Court did not consider in Bivens.  582 U.S. at 140.  And even though the 
Court’s analysis in Egbert was made in the second step of the framework, the 
Supreme Court observed that the two-step Abbasi analysis “often resolve[s] to a 

single question: whether there is any reason to think that Congress might be better 
equipped to create a damages remedy.”  142 S. Ct. at 1803.  Egbert stresses that the 
existence of a remedial scheme is sufficient by itself to carry the day: “If there are 
alternative remedial structures in place, ‘that alone’, like any special factor, is 
reason enough to ‘limit the power of the Judiciary to infer a new Bivens cause of 
action.’”  Id. at 1804; see also id. at 1806 (holding that existence of “alternative 

remedies . . . independently foreclose a Bivens action”).  That is the case here: the 
existence of the alternative remedial scheme is enough to both place the case into a 
new context at the first step and to prohibit expanding Bivens at the second step. 


Bivens.  Additionally, because these alternative remedial structures are sufficient to 
require dismissal, the court does not reach whether the Federal Tort Claims Act, 28 
U.S.C. § 2675, might also foreclose Arias’s Bivens claims.                
At bottom, this case is like Egbert: it presents with facts virtually 
indistinguishable from Bivens.  But the two-step framework boils down to one 
question: whether the presence of a special factor which was not considered in 

Bivens precludes its application.  The court answers that question in the 
affirmative.  The alternative remedial scheme authorized by the Inspector General 
Act and implemented by the Executive branch is a reason to believe that Congress 
is better positioned to create a damages remedy than the court.  See Egbert, 142 S. 
Ct. at 1803, 1806-07.  For that reason, Arias’s first set of excessive force claims are 
dismissed.                                                                
II.  Failure to Intervene                                                 

Defendants also move for summary judgment as to Arias’s failure-to-  
intervene claims, arguing that Bivens did not involve claims for failure to intervene 
in the use of excessive force.  Few courts have directly confronted the question,6 and 
there is minimal authority expressly recognizing a remedy under Bivens for failure 
to intervene in the use of excessive force.  Accord Robinson v. Sauls, 2019 WL 


6 Most opinions involving Fourth Amendment claims brought under Bivens 
address arguments that the allegations are insufficient or are blocked by the difficult 
hurdle of qualified immunity.  There are many decisions that address failure-to-
intervene claims brought under Bivens, but none that the court can find which 
persuasively explain (considering Abbasi, Hernandez, or Egbert) why such a claim 
arises in the same context as that in Bivens.  And, prior to Abbasi, the First Circuit 
“construed Bivens claims with some generality.”  Ortega v. U.S. Customers & Border 
Protection, --- F. Supp. 3d ---, 2023 WL 2187896, at *5 n.2 (D. Mass. 2023) (noting 
that—considering Abbasi and Egbert—it is “highly doubtful” that the First Circuit’s 
pre-Abbasi  decisions  which  apply  Bivens  in  this  way  “remain[]  good  law  in  all 
respects”).                                                               
13270432, at *10-*11 (N.D. Ga. Mar. 13, 2019) (“Ms. Robinson has not provided any 
authority indicating that a Bivens remedy exists for failure to intervene.  The Court 
has conducted its own search and similarly finds no such authority.”).  Arias 

identifies one case, Campbell v. City of Yonkers, which held that a failure-to-
intervene claim does not state a separate constitutional violation but is instead an 
alternate theory of liability for the alleged use of excessive force.  2020 WL 5548784, 
at *10 (S.D.N.Y. Sept. 16, 2020).  On that basis, the court rejected an argument that 
the plaintiff’s failure-to-intervene claims presented Bivens in a new context.  Id.7   
Regardless of whether a failure-to-intervene claim is an alternative theory of 
liability or separate constitutional violation, Bivens did not involve any theory that 

the defendant officers’ failure to intervene should subject them to bystander liability 
under Bivens.  And, in light of the Supreme Court’s recent Bivens jurisprudence, 
this seems like a meaningful difference.  “[E]ven a modest extension is still an 
extension.”  Abbasi, 582 U.S. at 147; see also Hernandez, 140 S. Ct. at 743 (“A claim 
may arise in a new context even if it is based on the same constitutional provision” 
as Bivens).  Most importantly, however, (and for the reasons discussed above), the 

existence of an alternative remedial scheme is sufficient to place the case in a new 
context and foreclose this Bivens claim.                                  


7 The other case cited by Arias on this topic, Damiani v. Duffy, does not provide 
any analysis of this issue and is therefore unhelpful.  See 277 F. Supp. 3d 692, 706 
(D.  Del.  2017)  (granting  summary  judgment  in  defendants’  favor  on  failure  to 
intervene claims because the plaintiff had not shown excessive force as opposed to 
analyzing whether the case presented Bivens in a new context).            
 For these reasons, Arias’s failure-to-intervene claims apply Bivens to a new 
context and the existence of an alternative remedial structure requires the same 
analysis that the court used to dismiss Arias’s first set of excessive-force claims. 
The court therefore grants defendants’ motion for summary judgment on Arias’s 
“failure to intervene” excessive-force claims. 

                          CONCLUSION 
 Arias’s claims would extend Bivens to a new context and special factors 
counsel against expanding Bivens to that new context.  Arias’s claims are therefore 
dismissed.  Defendants’ motion for summary judgment (doc. no. 66) is granted.  The 
clerk of court is directed to close the case. 
 SO ORDERED.
                                    Lando    afer 
                                     United Steteg' District Judge 
June 27, 2023                                        Lf 
cc:    Counsel of Record 

                                 16

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                           

               DISTRICT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE                             


Robert Arias,                                                             
Plaintiff                                                            

v.                                 Case No. 17-cv-516-SM             
                                   Opinion No. 2021 DNH 011          

Michael Bernard; Noah Herzon;                                             
Ty Kucharski; Christopher Day;                                            
Adalberto Garcia; and Juan Infante,                                       
Defendants                                                           


                       O R D E R                                     

On September 8, 2016, Robert Arias was arrested in an                
operation that involved the six named defendants, as well as              
about a dozen other federal law enforcement officers.  He claims          
the arresting officers used excessive force against him (count            
1) and says those officers who witnessed his violent arrest               
failed to protect him from the excessive force used by others             
(count 2).  He seeks monetary damages for physical and emotional          
injuries he claims to have suffered.  See generally Bivens v.             
Six Unknown Named Agents of Fed. Bureau of Narcotics, 403 U.S.            
388 (1971).1                                                              
                                                                     
1    Although several of the named defendants are police                  
officers employed by the cities of Nashua and Manchester, New             
Hampshire, they appear to have been “detailed” to work on a               
federal drug interdiction task force.  Accordingly, the parties           
have assumed that, for purposes of this suit, all defendants are          
Defendants move for summary judgment, asserting that there           
are no genuinely disputed material facts and saying they are              
entitled to judgment as a matter of law.  Alternatively, they             
say they are entitled to the protections afforded by qualified            
immunity.  For the reasons discussed, that motion is granted as           

to two defendants, but denied as to all remaining defendants.             

                  Standard of Review                                 
When ruling on a motion for summary judgment, the court is           
“obliged to review the record in the light most favorable to the          
nonmoving party, and to draw all reasonable inferences in the             
nonmoving party’s favor.”  Block Island Fishing, Inc. v. Rogers,          
844 F.3d 358, 360 (1st Cir. 2016) (citation omitted).  Summary            
judgment is appropriate when the record reveals “no genuine               
dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to             
judgment as a matter of law.”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a).  In this            
context, a factual dispute “is ‘genuine’ if the evidence of               

record permits a rational factfinder to resolve it in favor of            
either party, and ‘material’ if its existence or nonexistence             
has the potential to change the outcome of the suit.”  Rando v.           
Leonard, 826 F.3d 553, 556 (1st Cir. 2016) (citation omitted).            

                                                                     
properly treated as federal agents.  See generally 5 U.S.C. §§            
3374(a)(2) and (c)(2).                                                    
                      Background                                     
During the summer of 2016, members of the High Intensive             
Drug Trafficking Area Task Force (“HIDTA”), with the assistance           
of an undercover Drug Enforcement Administration operative, made          
several controlled purchases of fentanyl-laced heroin from the            

plaintiff, Robert Arias.                                                  

On September 8, 2016, the six named defendants, along with           
10 to 15 other law enforcement officers, were assigned to aid in          
Arias’s arrest at the Rockingham Mall, in Salem, New Hampshire.           
As Arias approached the mall, the decision was made to arrest             
him in the parking area, before he could exit his vehicle.  The           
car was driven by Arias’s wife, Carmen Jose.  Arias was seated            
in the front passenger seat.  Once Ms. Jose pulled into a                 
parking spot, several law enforcement vehicles blocked the car            
in.  Jose briefly tried to back up, but realized she was unable           
to do so.  She then put the car in park, as numerous officers,            

many in plain clothes and with weapons drawn, surrounded the              
vehicle.                                                                  

All agree that Arias and Jose complied with the officers’            
commands and did not resist.  Jose was removed from the vehicle           
without incident.  As officers attempted to remove Arias from             
the vehicle, they quickly realized they could not do so because           
he was wearing a seatbelt.  One of the officers then cut Arias’s          
seatbelt and he was dragged from the car, taken to the ground,            
and handcuffed.  According to the defendants (some of whom                
actively participated in the arrest, while others merely                  
observed it), the arrest was quick, routine, non-violent, and             

unremarkable.  Because Arias offered no resistance, all                   
defendants join in saying that very little force was needed to            
extract him from the car, take him to the ground, secure his              
arms and legs, and restrain him in handcuffs.  In support of              
their view that Arias suffered no significant injuries,                   
defendants point to Arias’s booking photos, which do not appear           
to show any visible injuries to his face or head, and reveal              
only a small mark or abrasion on the right side of his neck.              
See Declaration of Michael Bernard, Exhibit 1 (document no. 43-           
3) at 10-15.                                                              

Arias and his wife tell a markedly different story.  They            

agree that Arias offered no resistance and complied with the              
officers’ commands.  But, they say the officers used excessive            
force in extracting Arias from the vehicle, taking him to the             
ground, and restraining him on the ground.  According to Arias’s          
sworn testimony:                                                          
When we arrived in the parking lot and stopped, two                  
men, in plain clothes approached the car and had guns                
drawn.                                                               

As they approached the car, I put my hands up.  The                  
windows of the car were not tinted, so the men                       
approaching the car could see that I was putting up my               
hands.                                                               

I did nothing throughout the Arrest to resist being                  
arrested.                                                            

The two men pulled me from the car, mainly by my neck.               
It was done very forcibly.  At the same time, they cut               
my seatbelt with a knife and threw me to the ground.                 

I then noticed that there were many men/officers                     
around me, the majority were in plain clothes and many               
had their guns drawn.  They were yelling something                   
like “don’t move.”                                                   

I was yelling at Carmen, who was pregnant at the time,               
to “leave” in Spanish.  I was worried about her and                  
her pregnancy.                                                       

After I was on the ground, there were approximately 7                
men/officers on top of me.  I was not resisting arrest               
at all.  They were mainly on top of my legs and it                   
hurt my knee.  There was an intense pressure on my leg               
that caused me to scream in pain.                                    

The men/officers again banged my head to the ground,                 
mainly the right side of my head.                                    

I don’t remember where they touched me, I just have an               
intense memory of the pain in my leg.                                

I lost consciousness and was so afraid that I urinated               
in my pants.                                                         

Again, I was not resisting arrest at all, just yelling               
out in pain and trying to protect Carmen by not having               
her see what was happening.  I may have been moving                  
because of the pain that they were causing.                          

They put handcuffs on me after I was on the ground.                  
After the handcuffs were on me, the men/officers                     
stepped on me, on my left leg, while I was on the                    
ground. I think it was not necessary as I was already                
in handcuffs.  They did this multiple times.                         


Affidavit of Robert Arias (document no. 48-2), at paras. 7-19.            
See also Arias’s Answers to Interrogatories (document no. 43-10)          
at 3 (“Two agents came out [and] my wife put the car in reverse.          
The two Agents who exited Macy’s ordered us to stop the car.  My          
wife then came to a complete stop and put the car in park.  One           
of the Agents then opened the passenger door, [and they]                  
identified themselves as ‘DEA Agents.’  One of the Agents used            
excessive force to take me out [of] the vehicle, by pulling me            
out by [my] neck when my seatbelt was still on.  One of the               
Agents then cut off my seatbelt.  They slammed me to the ground           
[and] several more Agents came.  The[n] one of the Agents cut             
off my waist belt on my pants.  I pissed my pants out of fear             
for my life as the Agents continuously assaulted me.  I thought           
my life was over.”).                                                      

Arias’s wife, Carmen Jose, recounts a similar version of             
the relevant events and describes the arresting officers as               
having used more force against Arias than was objectively                 
reasonable under the circumstances.2                                      
                                                                     
2    See generally Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386, 397 (1989)             
(noting that the inquiry into whether law enforcement officers            
I am the wife of Robert Arias, who was arrested on                   
September 8, 2016 (“Arrest”) and filed a complaint                   
against the U.S. Government on or about October 2017                 
(17-CV-516-SM) (“Lawsuit”) related to his Arrest.  I                 
have not seen the Complaint, but my husband has spoken               
of it to me.                                                         

My husband, Robert, does not speak or understand                     
English.  He came to the United States from the                      
Dominican Republic in 2015.                                          

I was present on September 8, 2016 when Robert was                   
arrested in the parking lot of the Rockingham Mall in                
Salem, New Hampshire.                                                

At the time of the Arrest, I was 3 months pregnant and               
it was a delicate pregnancy because of my health.                    

I drove up to the Rockingham Mall parking lot, and                   
Robert was in the passenger seat.  Some suspicious men               
approached the car.  Then a vehicle blocked in our                   
car.  I was in the driver’s seat at the time and                     
Robert was in the passenger seat.                                    

As the men/officers approached me, I told them that I                
was pregnant and not to touch me.                                    

I saw much of what happened to Robert before I was led               
away by a man/officer to a car with tinted windows.                  

At no time during the Arrest did Robert or I resist                  
being arrested.  We were both very concerned about my                
pregnancy.                                                           

I saw the men (who were not in uniform) approach our                 
car with guns drawn.  They forcibly grabbed Robert out               
of the car and cut the seatbelt.  In addition, they                  
cut the belt to his pants.                                           

                                                                     
employed excessive force in the context of an arrest or                   
investigatory stop is an objective one, focused on whether the            
officers’ conduct was “objectively reasonable in light of the             
facts and circumstances confronting them.”)                               
I saw them punch Robert on the face when they took him               
out of the car.  They used a choke hold to get Robert                
out of the car and then slam him to the ground.                      

When they slammed Robert to the ground, I believe he                 
hit his head because he screamed.                                    

I remember saying “What are you guys doing?” as I                    
could not believe why they were using such force on                  
Robert.                                                              

I remember Robert saying to me “Tell them not to hurt                
me like that” in Spanish.                                            

At this point there were many, many men around, enough               
to fill a chapel.  Most of them were in regular                      
clothes, not police uniforms.                                        

I saw that many men/officers were on top of Robert and               
started to step on Robert’s leg and stomach.  At one                 
point, I saw at least 5 men/officers, who were on top                
of Robert, mainly on his leg and knee.                               

At this point they also started kicking Robert, mainly               
in the ribs and I believe it was on the right side.                  

I saw them pick up Robert and slam him to the ground.                

They used such force with Robert that he urinated on                 
himself.                                                             

Throughout this whole time, the officers kept their                  
guns drawn even though neither Robert nor I were                     
resisting arrest at all.  Our main focus was on my                   
pregnancy.  Some of the men/officers put their guns                  
away when Robert was on the ground.                                  

Throughout the Arrest, Robert was screaming at me to                 
“leave” in Spanish as he was concerned about the                     
pregnancy.  I believe that Robert was concerned that                 
watching him getting beat up would cause me distress                 
and could affect the pregnancy.                                      

I addition, I remember Robert screaming in pain at                   
times and shouting “my knee, my knee” a number of                    
times.  It was very distressing to hear Robert in such               
pain and not be able to do anything.  Robert does not                
speak English, so all these words were in Spanish.                   

                         * * *                                       

I saw Robert again that evening at the County jail.                  
His face was swollen (his eye and lips on the right                  
side) and he had dark marks.  In addition, he showed                 
me his knee which was swollen.  He complained of the                 
hurt.  The swollenness seemed to be getting worse with               
time.                                                                


Affidavit of Carmen Jose (document no. 48-3) at paras. 2-22, 25.          

Corroborating the accounts of Arias and Jose are medical             
records showing that Arias sought treatment (in the jail) in              
November of 2016 for an injury to his knee.  Subsequently, in             
March of 2017, he saw the jail’s nurse, who reported that Arias           
said he was unable to bend his left knee.  Strafford County               
House of Corrections Medical Records (document no. 51-2) at 10.           
Three days later, X-rays of Arias’s left hip and left knee were           
ordered “due to chronic pain.”  Id.  The physician’s assistant            
reported, “Assessment: Chronic hip and knee pain over the last            
six months. . ..  I suspect patient has significant degenerative          
changes.  Likely will need orthopedic management.”  Id.                   

Jail records reveal that Arias again complained of “hip and          
knee pain” in September of 2017.  Id. at 9 (“Seen in unit for ss          
c/o hip pain.  CO used as interpreter.  IM states he was seen at          
seacoast ortho about 5 months ago and was given a shot for the            
pain.  It helped for a few days but then the pain returned.”).            
That same day, Arias was seen by a physician, who prescribed              
Ibuprofen, 800 mg, twice a day for 90 days.  In June of 2018,             
Arias was again seen for “chronic hip and knee pain” and the              

nurse noted “marked [osteoarthritis] L knee; mild OA L hip.”              
Id. at 7.                                                                 

More recently, in January of 2019, and again in March of             
2019, Arias was seen by jail staff for complaints of chronic              
pain in his left knee and hip.  One medical note states that a            
physician reviewed Arias’s medical records and entered the                
following order: “OK to MRI left hip to ‘assess lateral hip for           
chronic bursitis changes and possible gluteal tear.’”  Id. at 5.          
Another note suggests that Arias was directed to have an                  
“outside consult” with an orthopedic specialist.  Id.                     


                      Discussion                                     
Two defendants – Juan Infante and Adalberto Garcia – move            
for summary judgment on grounds that they were not present for,           
nor did they even witness, Arias’s arrest.  Rather, those                 
officers have testified that they remained inside the Rockingham          
Mall during the entire course of that arrest.  See Affidavit of           
Juan Infante (document no. 43-6); Affidavit of Adalberto Garcia           
(document no. 43-7).  Arias does not dispute those statements.            
Although his complaint identifies those officers as having                
participated in his arrest, his subsequent answers to                     
interrogatories reveal that he cannot identify Infante or Garcia          
as having been in the group who allegedly assaulted him (or who           

allegedly stood by while he was being assaulted).  See Answer to          
Interrogatory No. 2 (document no. 43-10) at 4.  See generally             
Gray v. Cummings, 917 F.3d 1, 5–6 (1st Cir. 2019) (collecting             
cases and discussing the situation in which a plaintiff has               
little or no memory of the events underpinning his or her                 
claims).                                                                  

Because there is no evidence that Infante or Garcia                  
participated in or witnessed Arias’s arrest (and there is sworn           
testimony that they did not), defendants Infante and Garcia               
cannot be held liable for using excessive force or for failing            
to intervene and stop other officers who were allegedly using             

excessive force.                                                          

Each of the remaining defendants, however, either actively           
participated in Arias’s arrest, or was present for and                    
witnessed, his arrest.  As to those defendants, it is plain that          
there are genuinely disputed material facts that preclude entry           
of judgment as a matter of law in their favor.  If a jury were            
to credit the accounts of Arias and his wife, it could plausibly          
find for Arias on one or more of his Bivens claims against those          
remaining defendants – that is, a jury could sustainably                  
conclude that one or more defendants violated Arias’s Fourth              
Amendment rights by employing objectively unreasonable force to           

take him into custody, and after he was in custody.                       

Finally, given the state of the factual record at this               
juncture, the doctrine of qualified immunity affords defendants           
no protection.  As presently developed, the record suggests               
that: Arias had no history of violence; officers did not have             
reason to suspect that he would react violently to their efforts          
to take him into custody; officers had no reason to suspect that          
Arias might be armed; Arias was not armed; Arias was being                
arrested for a non-violent crime; and Arias cooperated                    
completely with the arresting officers and offered no                     
resistance.  Under such circumstances, the level of force used            

against Arias – as alleged by Arias and his wife – would                  
obviously run afoul of the Fourth Amendment’s reasonableness              
requirement.  See, e.g., Raiche v. Pietroski, 623 F.3d 30, 39             
(1st Cir. 2010) (“We need not decide whether there are                    
materially similar cases of controlling authority or a consensus          
of persuasive authority existing at the time of the incident              
which would have clearly established the law.  This is because            
[the  officer’s]  excessive  conduct  was  such  an  obvious  violation 
of  the  Fourth  Amendment’s  general  prohibition  on  unreasonable 
force  that  a  reasonable  officer  would  not  have  required  prior 
case  law  on  point  to  be  on  notice  that  his  conduct  was 
unlawful.”)   (citations  and  internal  punctuation  omitted). 

                            Conclusion 
 Defendants’  motion  for  summary  judgment  (document  no.  43) 
is  granted  in  part  and  denied  in  part.   As  to  defendants  Juan 
Infante  and  Adalberto  Garcia,  that  motion  is  granted.   As  to  all 
remaining  defendants,  however,  the  existence  of  genuinely 
disputed  material  facts  precludes  judgment  as  a  matter  of  law. 
Their  motion  for  summary  judgment  is,  therefore,  necessarily 
denied. 

 SO  ORDERED. 
                                    Gorm     tedaddfe— 
                                      teven   &.  McAuliffe 
                                     United  States  District  Judge 
January  19,  2021 
cc:   Robert  Arias,  pro  se 
 Jeremy  David  Eggleton,  Esq. 
 Michael  T.  McCormack,  AUSA 

                                 13

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
            FOR THE DISTRICT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE                         


Robert Arias                                                              

v.                                  Case No. 17-cv-516-SM             
                                    Opinion No. 2019 DNH 200          
U.S. Government et al.                                                    


                        O R D E R                                     


 Before the court is plaintiff Robert Arias’s motion to               
appoint counsel (Doc. No. 35).  The defendants have notified the          
court that they take no position on the motion.  See Defs.’ Nov.          
13, 2019 Resp. (Doc. No. 36).                                             
 “There is no absolute constitutional right to a free lawyer          
in a civil case.”  DesRosiers v. Moran, 949 F.3d 15, 23 (1st              
Cir. 1991).  Indeed, the statute authorizing the appointment of           
counsel in civil cases filed in forma pauperis, 28 U.S.C. §               
1915(e)(1), does not authorize the court to compel counsel to             
accept a pro bono appointment.  This court may deny a motion to           
appoint counsel for an indigent plaintiff in a civil case unless          
there are “exceptional circumstances present such that a denial           
of counsel [would be] likely to result in fundamental unfairness          
impinging on his due process rights.”  Id.; see also 28 U.S.C.            
§ 1915(e)(1).  “To determine whether there are exceptional                
circumstances sufficient to warrant the appointment of counsel,           
a court must examine the total situation, focusing, inter alia,           
on the merits of the case, the complexity of the legal issues,            
and the litigant’s ability to represent himself.” DesRosiers,             
949 F.2d at 24.                                                           

 In support of his motion, Arias asserts that he can neither          
read, write, nor speak English, and that he must rely on the              
assistance he receives from other inmates to help him prepare             
written materials to litigate this case.  Arias has now advised           
the court that he has recently been transferred and is now                
housed at a private prison facility where the overwhelming                
majority of inmates are “immigrants who barely speak, read or             
write English.”  Nov. 4, 2019 Pl.’s Mot. Appoint. Counsel (Doc.           
No. 35, at 2).                                                            
 The court notes that, without the assistance of a Spanish-           
English interpreter, Arias was unable to participate in court             
conferences.1  The court cannot rule out the possibility that             

Arias’s failure to propound discovery requests and to respond to          
the defendants’ motion for summary judgment (Doc. No. 27), is             
the result of his inability to communicate in English.  Because           
this case is one in which Arias and the defendants are relying            
on very different versions of the facts, if Arias is unable to            
seek discovery or to respond to the summary judgment motion, he           


 1The court has authorized funds for an interpreter to be             
present at the last two hearings in this case and anticipates             
doing so for any future hearing scheduled in this matter.                 
will likely be unable to litigate any meritorious claims he may           
have in this matter.                                                      
 The court finds, therefore, that the totality of Arias’s             

situation demonstrates that the interests of justice and                  
judicial economy would be served if counsel were appointed to             
represent Arias in this matter.  Therefore, the court grants              
Arias’s motion for the appointment of counsel (Doc. No. 35),              
subject to the condition that the court, on or before February            
3, 2020, is able to find suitable counsel willing to represent            
Arias in this matter.  Accordingly, the court issues the                  
following order in this case:                                             
 1.   Arias’s motion for court-appointed counsel (Doc. No.            
 35) is GRANTED, conditioned on this court’s ability to               
 identify suitable counsel willing to represent Arias in              
 this matter.                                                         

 2.   The court directs the clerk’s office to attempt to              
 find counsel willing to represent Arias pro bono, pursuant           
 to its ordinary procedures.                                          

 3.   Prospective appointed counsel shall be notified that:           

      a.   No funds would be available to pay counsel’s fees          
      and costs in this case, except that counsel may seek            
      payment for expert expenses, including the use of an            
      interpreter to allow counsel to communicate with                
      Arias, not to exceed $5000.00, if counsel determines            
      that, in his or her professional opinion, such expert           
      and/or interpreter services are needed to litigate              
      plaintiff’s claims;                                             

      b.   Counsel is free to decline the court’s request to          
      appear in this matter without consequences; and                 

      c.   Counsel, upon request, may have thirty days to             
      review documents and contact plaintiff before                   
        notifying  the  court  as  to  whether  or  not  she  or  he 
        will  accept  the  appointment. 
  4,     Upon  request  of  prospective  counsel,  the  clerk’s 
  office  shall  forward  to  counsel  a  copy  of  the  docket  sheet 
  in  this  matter  and  any  other  documents  identified  by 
  counsel  that  have  been  filed  in  this  case,  including: 
              °      the  Complaint  (Doc.  No.  1); 
              e      the  May  7,  2018  Report  and  Recommendation 
                    (Doc.  No.  8)  and  Order  (Doc.  No.  9); 
              °      the  May  18,  2018  Objection  (Doc.  No.  11); 
              °      the  May  22,  2018  Order  (Doc.  No.  14); 
              °      the  July  27,  2018  Answer  (Doc.  No.  18); 
              e      the  November  26,  2018  Order  (Doc.  No.  25); 
              e      the  July  16,  2019  Motion  for  Summary 
                    Judgment  (with  attachments)   (Doc.  No.  27); 
              e      the  October  11,  2019  Order  (Doc.  No.  33); 
                    and 
              °      the  plaintiff's  Motion  to  Appoint  Counsel 
                    (Doc.  No.  35)  and  the  defendants’  response 
                    (Doc.  No.  36)  thereto. 
  5.     The  clerk’s  office  will  notify  plaintiff  by  February 
  3,  2020  whether  suitable  counsel  willing  to  accept  a  pro 
  bono  appointment  has  been  located. 

                             Conclusion 
  For  the  foregoing  reasons,  Arias’s  motion  for  court- 
appointed  counsel  (Doc.  No.  35)  is  GRANTED,  subject  to  the 
conditions  set  forth  in  this  Order. 
  SO  ORDERED. 

                                Andrea  K.  Johnstone 
                                United  States  Magistrate  Judge 
December  2,  2019 
ec:    Robert  Arias,  pro  se 
  Michael  T.  McCormack,  Esq.