UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                           
                   DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                             

DIANA AVDEEVA,                 *                                         
                               *                                         
     Plaintiff,                *                                         
                               *                                         
          v.                   *    Civil Action No. 1:20-cv-10364-IT    
                               *                                         
KRISTEN M. SMITH, in her official  *                                     
capacity as U.S. Citizenship and Immigration  *                          
Services Field Office Director, PETER  *                                 
SIMONDS, in his official capacity as a U.S.  *                           
Citizenship and Immigration Services  *                                  
Immigration Services Officer, DENIS C.  *                                
RIORDAN, in his official capacity as U.S.  *                             
Citizenship and Immigration Services  *                                  
District Director, and TRACY RENAUD, in  *                               
her official capacity as Acting Director of  *                           
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services,  *                            
                               *                                         
     Defendants.               *                                         

                     MEMORANDUM & ORDER                                  

                           June 9, 2022                                  
TALWANI, D.J.                                                             
    Pending before the court is Plaintiff Diana Avdeeva’s Motion for Attorney’s Fees [Doc. 
No. 46] pursuant to the Equal Access to Justice Act (“EAJA”), 28 U.S.C. § 2412. For the 
following reasons, the motion is DENIED.                                  
 I.   Factual Background1                                                
    On March 28, 2013, Avdeeva married Grigoriy Rogach, a United States citizen. Compl. 
¶ 21, APA Action, ECF No. 1. In connection with her marriage, she filed an application to adjust 


1 The facts are presented as alleged by Avdeeva in this action and Avdeeva v. Smith, et al., No. 
20-cv-10219 (D. Mass. Feb. 5, 2020) (“APA Action”), and as set forth in immigration records 
submitted in connection with the two actions.                             
her status to that of a permanent resident on November 5, 2013. Id. at ¶ 24. The application was 
approved on August 7, 2014, but because Avdeeva had been married for fewer than two years, 
her permanent resident status was granted on a conditional, two-year basis, pursuant to 8 U.S.C. 
§ 1186a(a)(1). Id. at ¶ 24.                                               

    On July 29, 2016, Avdeeva and Rogach filed a petition to remove the conditions on her 
residence in the United States (“I-751 petition”). Id. at ¶ 25. The United States Citizenship and 
Immigration Services (“USCIS”) did not schedule an interview nor waive the interview 
requirement. Id.2                                                         
    On August 10, 2017, USCIS sent Avdeeva a request for evidence, stating that it needed 
additional evidence to process her petition. Id. at ¶ 30. Avdeeva, through counsel, sent the 
requested supplemental information on October 26, 2017. Id. at ¶ 32. USCIS still did not 
schedule or waive the interview and never responded in any other manner. Id. at ¶ 34. 
    In September 2018, Avdeeva and Rogach divorced. Id. at ¶ 35. Avdeeva notified USCIS 
of the divorce and requested to convert the pending I-751 petition from a joint petition to a 

waiver petition pursuant to 8 U.S.C. § 1186a(c)(4)(B). Id. at ¶ 36. In support, Avdeeva submitted 
evidence of cohabitation, numerous affidavits of third parties, photographs of the couple together 
over the years, and additional documentation demonstrating that, prior to the events leading to 
their divorce, Avdeeva and Rogach were in a bona fide marital relationship. Id. at ¶¶ 37-40. 
USCIS still did not schedule an interview or otherwise act on the petition. Id. at ¶ 42. 




2 Pursuant to 8 C.F.R. § 216.4(b)(1), the regional director of USCIS was required to “either 
waive the requirement for an interview and adjudicate the petition or arrange for an interview 
within 90 days of the date on which the petition was properly filed.”     
    On May 9, 2019, Avdeeva applied for naturalization. Id. at ¶ 43. USCIS scheduled a 
naturalization interview for October 15, 2019. Id. at ¶ 44. At the naturalization interview, an 
immigration officer instead conducted an interview on Avdeeva’s three-year old I-751 petition. 
Id. at ¶ 45.                                                              

    On October 28, 2019, USCIS denied the I-751 petition, concluding that Avdeeva had 
failed to establish that her marriage to Rogach was entered into in good faith, and terminated 
Avdeeva’s permanent resident status. USCIS Decision, APA Action, ECF No. 1-5. USCIS also 
issued a notice to appear, which stated that Avdeeva had been placed in removal proceedings and 
ordered her to appear before an immigration judge on April 7, 2020. Not. to Appear, APA 
Action, ECF No. 17-1. USCIS then administratively closed her naturalization case on the ground 
that USCIS did not have authority to adjudicate her naturalization application where she was 
subject to pending removal proceedings. Not. of Admin. Closure [Doc. No. 1-2]. 
 II.  Procedural Background                                              
    On February 5, 2020, Avdeeva filed the APA action, which challenged USCIS’s denial of 

her I-751 petition, revocation of her permanent resident status, and closing of her naturalization 
application as violations of various immigration regulations, the Administrative Procedures Act, 
5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(a), and her right to due process. Compl., APA Action, ECF No. 1. On 
February 21, 2020, Avdeeva filed the instant action, which alleged that USCIS had failed to 
adjudicate her naturalization application within the required statutory period and asked the court 
to take jurisdiction over her naturalization application pursuant to 8 U.S.C. § 1447(b). Pet. [Doc. 
No. 1]. The government filed motions to dismiss both actions. Mot. to Dismiss [Doc. No. 14]; 
Mot. to Dismiss, APA Action, ECF. No. 16. Avdeeva opposed both motions. Opp. to Mot. to 
Dismiss [Doc. No. 22]; Opp. to Mot. to Dismiss, APA Action, ECF No. 21.   
     On July 2, 2020, while those motions were still pending, the parties jointly filed a 
Motion to Remand [Doc. No. 27], which reported that the parties had entered into a settlement 
agreement and asked the court to remand this action to USCIS “to determine the matter in 
accordance with the parties’ settlement agreement.” Mot. to Remand 1 [Doc. No. 27]. The 

motion incorporated the parties’ settlement agreement as follows:         
    [T]he Government will take the following steps:                      

    (a) Within 60 days of this Court’s remand order, Plaintiff’s removal proceedings will be 
    terminated, her I-751 Petition will be approved, and a new N-400 interview will take 
    place.                                                               

    (b) If Plaintiff meets all requirements for naturalization (including language and civics 
    proficiency), the naturalization oath will be conducted within the same 60-day period 
    following this Court’s remand order.                                 

Id. at 2. The motion also requested that the court “hold the APA action . . . in abeyance at this 
time” and stated that Avdeeva would “voluntarily dismiss all pending claims and withdraw her 
claim for damages under the Federal Tort Claims Act” following the government’s satisfaction 
of the terms of the settlement agreement. Id. The court granted the motion, Elec. Order [Doc. No. 
28], remanded this case to USCIS on July 6, 2020, Order of Remand [Doc. No. 29], 
administratively closed the case, and stayed the APA action.              
    USCIS granted Avdeeva’s naturalization petition on August 17, 2020, and administered 
the oath of allegiance the same day; she is now a United States citizen. See Defs’ Mem. 1 [Doc. 
No. 42]. Avdeeva promptly filed a notice of voluntary dismissal in the APA action. Not. of 
Voluntary Dismissal, APA Action, ECF No. 23.                              
    On September 4, 2020, the parties filed status reports in this case. The government 
suggested that the case was moot where it had fulfilled its obligations under the settlement 
agreement. Defs’ Status Report [Doc. No. 30]. Avdeeva explained that she intended to file a 
request for fees and costs under the EAJA and refused to join the government in filing a joint 
notice of dismissal. Pl’s Status Report [Doc. No. 31]. On September 8, 2020, the court directed 
the clerk to administratively reopen this case as no final judgment had been entered and no 
dismissal had been filed. Elec. Order [Doc. No. 32].                      

    On October 6, 2020, Avdeeva sought entry of a judgment of dismissal pursuant to Fed. R. 
Civ. P. 58(a). Req. for Entry of J. [Doc. No. 38]. The government opposed entry of a judgment 
and filed a Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Jurisdiction [Doc. No. 39], arguing that the court 
should, instead, dismiss Avdeeva’s Complaint [Doc. No. 1], where her claims were now moot. 
The court granted Avdeeva’s request for entry of judgment and denied the government’s motion 
as moot. Mem. & Order [Doc. No. 44]. On June 7, 2021, the court entered a Judgment of 
Dismissal [Doc. No. 45], dismissing the case “in accordance with the parties’ settlement 
agreement.” On September 6, 2021, Avdeeva filed her Motion for Attorney’s Fees [Doc. No. 
46].                                                                      
 III.  Discussion                                                        

    Absent special circumstances, the EAJA authorizes attorneys’ fees when (1) the plaintiff 
was the prevailing party, and (2) the government’s position was without substantial justification. 
28 U.S.C. § 2412(d). See also Castaneda-Castillo v. Holder, 723 F.3d 48, 68-69 (1st Cir. 2013). 
Avdeeva argues that she has satisfied both requirements and requests $41,080 in fees and costs. 
The government counters that special circumstances apply where the terms of the parties’ 
settlement agreement preclude Avdeeva’s request for EAJA fees. The court finds that the 
government’s position was without substantial justification, but finds further that Avdeeva may 
not qualify as a “prevailing party” under First Circuit precedent and that, in any event, an award 
of fees is precluded by the terms of the settlement agreement.            
    A.   Substantial Justification                                       
    The government argues that its position on Avdeeva’s naturalization application was 
substantially justified. Specifically, it claims that once Avdeeva’s I-751 petition had been denied 
and she had been placed in removal proceedings, USCIS no longer had authority to adjudicate 

her naturalization application and therefore properly administratively closed that application. In 
making this argument, the government distinguishes between Avdeeva’s naturalization 
application and her I-751 petition, which was the subject of the APA action. The government 
emphasizes that “[w]ith respect to this case,” the agency actions giving rise to the litigation and 
its litigation positions were substantially justified.                    
    Naturalization begins when a noncitizen files an application for naturalization with 
USCIS. 8 C.F.R. §§ 310, 334. A USCIS officer then conducts an investigation and an in-person 
examination of the applicant before issuing a decision. Id. § 335. If the officer does not issue a 
decision within 120 days of conducting the in-person examination, the applicant may apply to 
the district court, which may then decide the matter outright or remand the application back to 

USCIS with instructions. 8 U.S.C. § 1447(b). However, no application for naturalization shall be 
considered by USCIS “if there is pending against the applicant a removal proceeding pursuant to 
a warrant of arrest.” Id. § 1429.                                         
    As described above, Avdeeva filed her naturalization petition on May 9, 2019, and 
USCIS scheduled her naturalization interview for October 15, 2019. But on that day, instead of 
conducting the naturalization interview, USCIS resurrected Avdeeva’s three-year-old I-751 
petition, on which it had taken no prior action. Then, in the middle of Avdeeva’s naturalization 
process, USCIS denied the I-751 petition and placed her in removal proceedings, which it then 
used as justification for closing her naturalization petition.            
    The government is correct that this case is ultimately about Avdeeva’s naturalization 
petition. But in evaluating the government’s position, a district court must “treat[] a case as an 
inclusive whole, rather than as atomized line-items.” Comm’r, INS v. Jean, 496 U.S. 154, 161-62 
(1990). “In other words, in evaluating the [g]overnment’s position, [the court] must ‘arrive at one 

conclusion that simultaneously encompasses and accommodates the entire civil action.’” 
Saysana v. Gillen, 614 F.3d 1, 5-6 (1st Cir. 2010) (quoting Dantran, Inc. v. U.S. Dep’t of Labor, 
246 F.3d 36, 41 (1st Cir. 2001)). And where USCIS is using its actions in response to Avdeeva’s 
I-751 petition to justify its actions giving rise to the litigation here, the court’s review must 
necessarily include some consideration of the reasonableness of USCIS’s position with respect to 
the I-751 petition.                                                       
    Taking those actions into consideration, USCIS sat on Avdeeva’s I-751 petition for more 
than three years, in violation of its own regulations. See 8 C.F.R. § 216.4(b)(1) (“The director 
must either waive the requirement for an interview and adjudicate the petition or arrange for an 
interview within 90 days of the date on which the petition was properly filed”). Only when 

Avdeeva filed her naturalization petition did USCIS take any action on the I-751 petition—
during her scheduled naturalization interview. Then, all on October 28, 2019, USCIS (1) denied 
Avdeeva’s I-751 petition, (2) terminated her permanent resident status, (3) issued a notice to 
appear for removal proceedings, and (4) based on that notice to appear, administratively closed 
her naturalization petition for lack of jurisdiction, contrary to the words of the statute, which 
strips USCIS’s jurisdiction to adjudicate naturalization petitions only “if there is pending against 
the applicant a removal proceeding pursuant to a warrant of arrest.” 8 U.S.C. § 1429.3  



3 USCIS regulations state that a “notice to appear” for removal proceedings “shall be regarded as 
a warrant of arrest” for purposes of the statute. 8 C.F.R. § 318.1. However, as the Ninth Circuit 
    Finally, this case is distinguishable from Aronov v. Napolitano, 562 F.3d 84, 97 (1st Cir. 
2009), where the First Circuit found a delay to allow an FBI background check “entirely 
reasonable.” Here, the government has offered no explanation for either its failure to timely act 
on the I-751 petition or the decision to deny it. To the contrary, the government explicitly agreed 

after the case was filed here that Avdeeva’s removal proceedings would be terminated, her I-751 
petition would be approved, and a new N-400 interview would take place. While those terms 
were incorporated into the settlement agreement, the government presumably did not lower its 
standards for making immigration decisions and, instead, made these decisions on the merits. 
    In sum, the court finds no substantial justification for USCIS’s termination of the 
naturalization process.                                                   
    B.   Prevailing Party                                                
    Avdeeva’s status as a prevailing party presents a more difficult question. To be a 
prevailing party, a plaintiff must show both a “material alteration of the legal relationship of the 
parties” and a “judicial imprimatur on the change.” Buckhannon Bd. & Care Home, Inc. v. W. 

Virginia Dep’t of Health & Hum. Res., 532 U.S. 598, 604-05 (2001). Judicial imprimatur may 
include a judgment on the merits or a consent decree that memorializes a settlement agreement. 
Id. at 604. Moreover, “the formal label of ‘consent decree’ need not be attached; it is the reality, 
not the nomenclature which is at issue.” Aronov, 562 F.3d at 90.          



concluded in considering this issue, “[t]he meaning of ‘warrant of arrest’ in § 1429 is 
unambiguous” and is a distinct document from a notice to appear. Yith v. Nielsen, 881 F.3d 
1155, 1166 (9th Cir. 2018). “If Congress intended to preclude the government’s consideration of 
a naturalization petition whenever the applicant was in removal proceedings, then it would have 
had no need to state that § 1429 is applicable only when a removal proceeding is ‘pursuant to a 
warrant of arrest.’” Id. at 1167.                                         
    Here, there were three relevant “material alterations” in the parties’ relationship. First, 
Avdeeva’s removal proceedings were terminated and her I-751 petition was approved. Second, 
USCIS reopened Avdeeva’s naturalization petition. Finally, Avdeeva was naturalized. 
    Turning to the issue of judicial imprimatur, Avdeeva contends that the court’s Order of 

Remand [Doc. No. 29] and its Judgment of Dismissal [Doc. No. 44] constitute the functional 
equivalent of a consent decree. The government argues that Avdeeva’s success in becoming a 
United States citizen was achieved through a private, voluntary settlement, not a court order. 
    In Aronov, on which the government relies, the First Circuit concluded that “an order 
remanding to the agency is alone not enough to establish the needed imprimatur.” Id. at 93 
(emphasis added). “A plaintiff does not become a prevailing party if the court merely recognizes 
what the government has voluntarily agreed to and only ‘requires the government to follow 
through with what it had already voluntarily promised to do.’” Id. at 92-93 (quoting Smith v. 
Fitchburg Public Schools, 401 F.3d 16, 27 (1st Cir. 2005)). In Aronov, the parties filed a joint 
motion for remand immediately after the plaintiff filed the action, and the district court remanded 

the matter to USCIS with no instruction and dismissed the underlying action. Id. at 92. Here, 
although the parties fully briefed the government’s Motion to Dismiss [Doc. No. 14], as in 
Aronov, prior to dismissal, “[t]he court made no evaluation at all of the merits of the 
controversy—indeed the court was never asked to do so; it was only asked to dismiss the case.” 
Id.                                                                       
    The dissent in Aronov pointed out that “district courts must determine that a proposed 
consent decree is fair, adequate and reasonable before entering it,” and noted that “it would be 
difficult for a district court to determine the fairness, reasonableness and adequacy of a proposed 
agreement without making some evaluation of the merits of the case in relation to the relief 
provided by the consent decree.” Id. at 106 (Lipez, C.J., dissenting). Here, the court did carefully 
evaluate the merits of the settlement agreement before granting the motion to remand and did 
retain jurisdiction over the matter. Nonetheless, under the majority decision in Aronov, this 
“judicial imprimatur” may not be enough.                                  

    The court need not finally resolve the question, however, where the fee petition fails due 
to special circumstances, based on the language of the settlement agreement.  
    C.   Special Circumstances                                           
    In arguing that special circumstances preclude an award of EAJA fees, the government 
first directs the court’s attention to pre-settlement communications in which Avdeeva evinced a 
willingness to forego EAJA fees on April 2, 2020. See Settlement Discussions 5 [Doc. No. 51-2]. 
But in April 2020, the government rejected Avdeeva’s settlement offer and, instead, filed 
motions to dismiss in both cases. See Mot. to Dismiss [Doc. No. 14] (filed April 17, 2020); Mot. 
to Dismiss, APA Action, ECF No. 16 (filed May 4, 2020). Accordingly, the court finds no basis 
for concluding that Avdeeva’s early settlement offer remained valid after the government 

rejected the offer and moved to dismiss both actions.                     
    The parties resumed settlement negotiations in June 2020—after Avdeeva’s counsel had 
opposed both motions—and these discussions apparently did not refer to a possible waiver of 
attorneys’ fees. See Settlement Discussions 33-34 [Doc. No. 51-2]. However, the agreement the 
parties entered into required that, after the government complied with the agreement’s terms, 
Avdeeva would “voluntarily dismiss all pending claims.” The government argues that Avdeeva’s 
agreement to “voluntarily dismiss all pending claims” must be read to include her demand for 
fees under EAJA.                                                          
    Although Avdeeva counters that she was not required to carve out attorneys’ fees from 
the settlement agreement, this is an issue of contract interpretation. While the parties did not 
define “claims,” at the time of the settlement, Avdeeva’s requests for relief in each action 
included “reasonable costs and attorneys’ fees and expenses pursuant to the Equal Access to 

Justice Act, 28 U.S.C. § 2412(d).” Pet. [Doc. No.1]; Compl., APA Action, ECF No. 1. The 
settlement agreement contained a broad release as to all claims; there was no exception for any 
request for attorneys’ fees and costs. Under those circumstances, the language of the agreement 
precludes any claim for fees, and it would therefore be inappropriate for the court to modify the 
negotiated release. See Freelander v. G. & K. Realty Corp., 357 Mass. 512, 516, 258 N.E.2d 786 
(1970) (where contract is unambiguous, it must be enforced according to its terms). 
 IV.  Conclusion                                                         
    For the reasons set forth above, Avdeeva’s Motion for Attorney’s Fees [Doc. No. 46] is 
DENIED.                                                                   
    IT IS SO ORDERED.                                                    

    June 9, 2022                       /s/ Indira Talwani                
                                       United States District Judge

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                           
               DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                             

                         *                                           
DIANA AVDEEVA,                *                                           
                         *                                           
     Plaintiff,          *                                           
                         *                                           
v.                       *    Civil Action No. 1:20-cv-10364-IT      
                         *                                           
KRISTEN M. SMITH, in her official   *                                     
capacity as U.S. Citizenship and   *                                      
Immigration Services Field Office Director, *                             
PETER SIMONDS, in his official capacity   *                               
as a U.S. Citizenship and Immigration   *                                 
Services Immigration Services Officer,   *                                
DENIS C. RIORDAN, in his official   *                                     
capacity as U.S. Citizenship and   *                                      
Immigration Services District Director,   *                               
and TRACY RENAUD, in her      *                                           
official capacity as Acting Director of   *                               
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services,  *                             
                         *                                           
     Defendants.         *                                           
                         *                                           

                MEMORANDUM AND ORDER                                 

                       June 1, 2021                                  
TALWANI, D.J.                                                             
On February 21, 2020, Plaintiff Diana Avdeeva filed a Complaint [#1] alleging the 
United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (“USCIS”) failed to timely resolve her 
naturalization application and asking this court to assume jurisdiction and adjudicate that 
application. On the parties’ agreement, the court remanded the case to USCIS, and Plaintiff was 
naturalized in August 2020. Presently before the court are Plaintiff’s Request for Entry of 
Judgment of Dismissal in Accordance with the Parties’ Settlement Agreement [#38] and 
Defendants’ Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Jurisdiction [#39]. For the reasons that follow, the 
court ALLOWS Plaintiff’s Request [#38] and DENIES Defendants’ Motion [#39].  
I.  Background                                                            
On or about May 9, 2019, Plaintiff submitted an application for naturalization to USCIS 
pursuant to 8 U.S.C. § 1427. Complaint (“Compl.”) ¶¶ 6, 12 [#1]. On October 16, 2019, Plaintiff 
appeared for her naturalization interview at the USCIS Lawrence Field Office. Id. at ¶ 6. After 

Plaintiff’s interview, USCIS administratively closed her case. Id. at ¶ 15. The Notice of 
Administrative Closure sent to Plaintiff by the USCIS Lawrence Field Office stated that her 
naturalization case had been closed because Plaintiff had been served with a Notice to Appear 
which placed her into removal proceedings and made her ineligible for naturalization. Notice of 
Administrative Closure [#1-2].                                            
Plaintiff filed her Complaint [#1] on February 21, 2020, asking this court to take 
jurisdiction over her naturalization application pursuant to 8 U.S.C. § 1447(b), id. at ¶ 1, and 
alleging USCIS violated 8 U.S.C. § 1447(b) by failing to make a decision on her naturalization 
application within 120 days of her naturalization interview and 8 C.F.R. § 316.14(b)(1) by failing 

to either grant or deny Plaintiff’s naturalization application and instead administratively closing 
her application. Id. at ¶¶ 16-23.1                                        
On July 2, 2020, the parties filed a Joint Motion to Remand Pursuant to 8 U.S.C. 
§ 1447(b) (“Remand Motion”) [#27] asking the court to remand the matter to USCIS “to 
determine the matter in accordance with the parties’ settlement agreement.” Id. at 1. The Remand 
Motion [#27] described the terms of the parties’ agreement:               


1 Plaintiff also filed a separate action, Avdeeva v. Smith et al., 20-cv-10219 (“the APA action”), 
challenging USCIS’ decisions to deny her I-751 petition, revoke her permanent resident status, 
and close her naturalization application as violations of various immigration regulations, the 
Administrative Procedures Act, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(a), and her right to due process. Avdeeva v. 
Smith, 20-cv-10219, Complaint ¶¶ 62-89 [#1].                              
the Government will take the following steps: (a) Within 60 days of this Court’s 
remand order, Plaintiff’s removal proceedings will be terminated, her I-751 
Petition will be approved, and a new N-400 interview will take place[;] (b) If 
Plaintiff meets all requirements for naturalization (including language and civics 
proficiency), the naturalization oath will be conducted within the same 60-day 
period following this Court’s remand order . . . . The parties respectfully request 
that this Court hold the APA action (C.A. No. 1:20-cv-10219-IT) in abeyance at 
this time. Upon the Government’s satisfaction with all of the terms [ ] above, 
Plaintiff will voluntarily dismiss all pending claims and withdraw her claim for 
damages under the Federal Tort Claims Act.                           

Id. at ¶¶ 3-4.                                                            
On July 6, 2020, the court remanded this case to USCIS “in accordance with the parties’ 
settlement agreement.” Order of Remand [#29]. The clerk then administratively closed the case.  
On August 17, 2020, USCIS granted Plaintiff’s application for naturalization and 
administered the Oath of Allegiance; Plaintiff is now a United States citizen. See Defendants’ 
Amended Mem. of Law in Support of Defendants’ Mot. to Dismiss (“Mem. in Support of Mot. 
Dismiss”) [#43].                                                          
On August 20, 2020, Plaintiff filed a Notice of Voluntary Dismissal [#23] in the APA 
Action.                                                                   
On September 4, 2020, the parties filed status reports in this case. See Defendants’ Status 
Report [#30]; Plaintiff’s Status Report [#31]. Defendants’ report suggested the case was moot 
because the government had fulfilled its obligations and noted that on “PACER, the status of the 
case has been ‘Terminated’ since July 6, 2020.” Defendants’ Status Report [#30]. In her status 
report, Plaintiff explained her intention to file a request for fees and costs under the Equal Access 
to Justice Act (“EAJA”), 28 U.S.C. § 2412(d), 5 U.S.C. § 504, and her refusal to join Defendants 
in a joint notice of dismissal which she viewed an attempt to avoid payment of fees under EAJA. 
Plaintiff’s Status Report [#31].                                          
On September 8, 2020, the court issued an order that the clerk reopen the administratively 
closed case as no judgment had been entered and no dismissal had been filed. Elec. Order [#32].  
II.  Discussion                                                           
Plaintiff seeks entry of judgment of dismissal under Fed. R. Civ. P. 58(a). Request for 
Entry of Judgment 3 [#38]. Defendants argue the court should instead dismiss the Complaint 
[#1] under Fed. R. Civ P. 12(b)(1) and 12(h)(3) for lack of subject matter jurisdiction because 

Plaintiff’s “claims relating to her naturalization application are now moot.” Mem. in Support of 
Mot. Dismiss 4 [#42]; see also Mot. Dismiss [#39]. Plaintiff argues in response that her case is 
not moot because her EAJA request for fees was included in her Complaint [#1] so there is still 
an issue for the court to resolve. Plaintiff’s Opp’n to Gov. Mot. to Dismiss (“Opp’n”) 2 [#43].2     
The court analyzes the issue somewhat differently than the parties. Plaintiff has now 
obtained all the relief that she sought in the Complaint [#1], other than her claim for fees. A party 
seeking attorney’s fees and costs under the EAJA cannot submit an application until there is an 
entry of final judgment. See 28 U.S.C. § 2142(d)(1) (final judgment must be entered in a civil 
action before EAJA filing period is triggered). Accordingly, the questions before the court are 

whether final judgment has already entered, and if not, whether it should enter on Plaintiff’s 
Request for Entry of Judgment Dismissal [#38] or on Defendants’ Motion to Dismiss [#39]. 
The court identifies two events that arguably may have already ended the case: (1) the 
court’s Remand Order [#29] remanding the case to USCIS or (2) Plaintiff’s naturalization. The 
court discusses these events in turn.                                     
As Defendants have noted, the case was marked terminated on CM/ECF when the court 


2 Plaintiff also contends that absent a court order directing the government to comply with the 
settlement agreement, the government could still claim her citizenship was “unlawfully 
procured” and denaturalize her. Opp’n 3 [#43]. This second argument is without merit where 
Plaintiff is not seeking an order directing the government to comply with the settlement 
agreement and instead concedes that the government has complied with that agreement. 
remanded the matter to USCIS. See Defendants’ Status Report [#30]. Despite that administrative 
designation, the Remand Order [#29] did not end the case. At the time the case was remanded, 
there was no resolution of Plaintiff’s request to be naturalized. See Mall Properties Inc. v. March, 
841 F.2d 440, 441 (1st Cir. 1988) (“the district court’s remand order does not grant [the plaintiff] 
ultimately what [the plaintiff] wants. Rather, the court’s order is but one interim step in the 

process towards [the plaintiff] obtaining its ultimate goal.”). Indeed, had Plaintiff filed a request 
for EAJA fees when the matter was remanded, Defendants likely would have argued that the 
request was premature.                                                    
Plaintiff was naturalized on August 17, 2020. Neither party sought an Order of Dismissal 
or Judgment at time. Treating the naturalization itself as a final judgment ignores all pleadings 
formalities and would create unacceptable confusion as to the timing of a fee petition. As the 
First Circuit has noted, “the legislative intent behind the EAJA counsel against creating 
confusion with regards to what constitutes a ‘final judgment’ for purposes of the statute.” 
Castaneda-Castillo v. Holder, 723 F.3d 48, 66 (1st Cir. 2013); see also H.R. Rep. 99-120, n. 26 

(provision of EAJA defining ‘final judgment’ “should not be used as a trap for the unwary 
resulting in the unwarranted denial of fees”).                            
The court turns to the parties’ competing requests. Under the parties’ settlement 
agreement, the parties’ agreed that “[u]pon the Government’s satisfaction with all of the terms [ ] 
above, Plaintiff will voluntarily dismiss all pending claims.” Plaintiff’s Request for Entry of 
Judgment [#38] seeks to do exactly what the parties agreed upon, see Joint Motion to Remand 
[#27], the court will dismiss the case in accordance with the parties’ agreement. Defendants’ 
Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Jurisdiction [#39] is denied as moot.       
III.  Conclusion                                                          
For the aforementioned reasons, Plaintiff’s Request [#38] is ALLOWED and Defendants’ 
Motion [#39] is DENIED. This case is DISMISSED according to the parties’ agreement, and the 
clerk shall issue a final judgment pursuant to this memorandum and order.  

IT IS SO ORDERED.                                                         
                                   /s/ Indira Talwani                        
Date: June 1, 2021                      United States District Judge