UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
                    DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO                              
___________________________________                                       
                                  )                                      
CANGREJEROS DE SANTURCE BASEBALL   )                                      
CLUB, LLC, SANTURCE MERCHANDISING  )                                      
LLC, and THOMAS J. AXON,           )                                      
                                  )                                        
                                  )                                      
                                  )                                      
                   Plaintiffs,    )                                      
                                  )         CIVIL ACTION                 
              v.                  )         NO. 3:22-01341-WGY           
                                  )                                      
LIGA DE BÉISBOL PROFESIONAL DE     )                                      
PUERTO RICO, INC., CRIOLLOS        )                                      
MANAGEMENT, INC., RA12, INC.,      )                                      
INDIOS DE MAYAGÜEZ BASEBALL CLUB   )                                      
INC., GIGANTES DE CAROLINA         )                                      
BASEBALL CLUB INC., LEONES DE      )                                      
PONCE CF INC., IMPULSE SPORTS      )                                      
ENTERTAINMENT CORPORATION, JUAN A. )                                      
FLORES GALARZA, IN HIS CAPACITY    )                                      
AS PRESIDENT OF THE LIGA DE        )                                      
BÉISBOL PROFESIONAL DE PUERTO RICO,)                                      
INC., IN HIS PERSONAL              )                                      
CAPACITY, AND AS A MEMBER OF THE   )                                      
CONJUGAL PARTNERSHIP               )                                      
CONSTITUTED BETWEEN HIM AND HIS    )                                      
SPOUSE, AND THE CONJUGAL           )                                      
PARTNERSHIP SO CONSTITUTED,        )                                      
                                  )                                      
                   Defendants.    )                                      
___________________________________)                                      
                                                                          
YOUNG, D.J.1                                      June 27, 2023           

                         MEMORANDUM & ORDER                              

    1 Of the District of Massachusetts, sitting by designation.          
                                                                         
 I.   INTRODUCTION                                                       
    The Court here boldly goes where no lower court has gone             
before.  Why?  The Supreme Court has said so.2  This Court                
applies the Supreme Court’s much criticized3 judicial exemption           


    2  In Agostini v. Felton, the Supreme Court held the trial           
court “acted within its discretion in entertaining the motion             
with supporting allegations, but it was also correct to                   
recognize that the motion had to be denied unless and until this          
Court reinterpreted the binding precedent.” Agostini v. Felton,           
521 U.S. 203, 237–38, 117 S. Ct. 1997, 2017, 138 L. Ed. 2d 391            
(1997). The Agostini Court also reaffirmed “[i]f a precedent of           
this Court has direct application in a case, yet appears to rest          
on reasons rejected in some other line of decisions, the Court            
of Appeals should follow the case which directly controls,                
leaving to this Court the prerogative of overruling its own               
decisions.” Id. (citing Rodriguez de Quijas v.                            
Shearson/Am. Express, Inc., 490 U.S. 477, 484 (1989) (Kennedy             
J.)).                                                                     
                                                                         
    3 The baseball exemption is heavily criticized by courts,            
legal scholars, and commentators. See Nathaniel Grow, Defining            
the "Business of Baseball": A Proposed Framework for Determining          
the Scope of Professional Baseball's Antitrust Exemption, 44              
U.C. DAVIS L. REV. 557 (2010) (“This lack of consensus regarding          
the scope of the exemption is particularly problematic because            
MLB regularly finds itself embroiled in antitrust disputes. For           
example, in August 2009, trading card manufacturer Upper Deck             
threatened to file an antitrust suit against MLB following MLB's          
decision to grant rival card manufacturer Topps an exclusive              
trademark license . . . in 2007, Pennsylvania Senator Arlen               
Specter alleged that a proposed deal between MLB and DirecTV,             
under which the satellite television company would have received          
the exclusive rights to air MLB's “Extra Innings” broadcasting            
package, violated antitrust law. Meanwhile, MLB's restrictive             
territory allocation policies--a regular source of antitrust              
complaints against the league--were again at issue in December            
2009 when the city attorney for San Francisco threatened to sue           
MLB after the league considered permitting the Oakland Athletics          
franchise to relocate to San Jose, territory assigned to the San          
Francisco Giants organization. Had any of these disputes resulted         
in litigation, the applicability of the baseball antitrust                
exemption would have been unclear under both the existing                 
                                                                         
to the Nation’s antitrust laws to a Puerto Rican professional             
baseball venture NOT associated with Major League Baseball                
(“MLB”).                                                                  
    The Plaintiffs, Cangrejeros de Santurce Baseball Club, LLC           
(“Cangrejeros LLC”), Santurce Merchandising LLC (“Santurce                

Merchandising”), and Thomas J.  Axon (“Axon”), collectively “The          
Plaintiffs,” bring a seven count complaint against the                    
Defendants, Liga de Béisbol Profesional de Puerto Rico, Inc.              
(the “League”), Criollos Management, Inc. (the “Criollos”),               
RA12, Inc. (“RA12”), Indios de Mayagüez Baseball Club Inc. (the           
“Indios”), Gigantes de Carolina Baseball Club Inc. (the                   
“Gigantes”), Leones de Ponce CF Inc. (the “Leones”), Impulse              
Sports Entertainment Corporation (“Impulse Sports”), Juan A.              
Flores Galarza, in his capacity as president of the Liga de               


judicial precedent and scholarly analysis.”); Nostalgic                   
Partners, LLC v. Off. of Comm'r of Baseball, No. 21-CV-10876              
(ALC), 2022 WL 14963876, at *1 (S.D.N.Y. Oct. 26, 2022)                   
(“Plaintiffs believe that the Supreme Court is poised to knock            
out the exemption, like a boxer waiting to launch a left hook             
after her opponent tosses out a torpid jab. It's possible. But            
until the Supreme Court or Congress takes action, the exemption           
survives; it shields MLB from Plaintiffs’ lawsuit.”); J. Gordon           
Hylton, Why Baseball's Antitrust Exemption Still Survives, 9              
MARQ. SPORTS L.J. 391 (1999) (“Neither Congressional inertia nor          
the power of Organized Baseball can explain the persistence of            
this exemption.”). The list goes on.                                      





                                                                         
Béisbol Profesional de Puerto Rico, Inc., in his personal                 
capacity (“Flores”), and as a member of the conjugal partnership          
constituted between him and his spouse, and the conjugal                  
partnership so constituted (“Flores Conjugal Partnership”) and            
collectively, “The Defendants.”  All counts are listed and                

described below:                                                          
(1) Count One alleges Violations of Section 1 of the Sherman              
Act: Agreement Among the Defendants in Unreasonable Restraint of          
Competition;                                                              
(2) Count Two alleges Violations of Section 2 of the Sherman              
Act: Conspiracy or Combination to Monopolize, Monopolization,             
and Attempted Monopolization;                                             
(3) Count Three alleges Violations of the Antitrust Law of                
Puerto Rico (P.R. Laws Ann. tit. 10, § 258): Agreement Among the          
Defendants in Unreasonable Restraint of Competition;                      
(4) Count Four alleges Violations of the Antitrust Law of Puerto          
Rico (P.R. Laws Ann. tit. 10, § 260): Conspiracy or Combination           

to Monopolize, Monopolization, and Attempted Monopolization;              
(5) Count Five alleges Violations of Fair Competition, P.R. Laws          
Ann. tit. 10, § 259, and Article 1536 of the Puerto Rico Civil            
Code, P.R. Laws Ann. tit. 31, §§ 10801 and 10803;                         
(6) Count Six alleges Contracts in Prejudice of a Third Person;           
(7) Count Seven alleges Violations of Civil Rights Act of 1871,           
42 U.S.C. § 1983.                                                         
                                                                         
    The Defendants first moved to dismiss the complaint for              
failure to state a claim, arguing that (1) the Plaintiffs are             
contractually bound to litigate their claims in the local courts          
of Puerto Rico, Def.’s Mot. Dismiss FSC (“Def’s. Mot. FSC”), ECF          
No. 28 at 5, and (2) the Plaintiffs’ action is barred by res              

judicata after the Plaintiffs lost their prior case filed in the          
local court of Puerto Rico.  Id. at 10.                                   
    The Defendants then moved to dismiss the complaint for lack          
of subject matter jurisdiction on the basis that the Plaintiffs’          
antitrust claims must be dismissed because the “business of               
baseball” is exempt from antitrust regulation, which would make           
the federal antitrust claims fail, thus giving this Court no              
subject matter jurisdiction to hear the case.  Def.’s Mot.                
Dismiss SMJ (“Def’s. Mot. SMJ”), ECF No. 43 at 6-13.                      
    Following the direction of the Supreme Court’s baseball              
exemption, this Court allows the Defendants’ motions to dismiss.          
    A.   Procedural History                                              

    The Plaintiffs, Axon and Cangrejeros LLC, previously filed           
a suit against the League and its President, Mr. Juan A. Flores           
Galarza, seeking a preliminary and permanent injunction, and              
seeking declaratory relief in Puerto Rico with regards to his             
dismissal.  Axon v. Liga De Beisbol Professional de Puerto Rico,          
Inc., No. SJ-2022-CV-02802 (Super. Ct. P.R. May 5, 2022).  The            

                                                                         
court dismissed the complaint, reasoning that “[we] must                  
conclude that the process followed by the President of the                
League complied with the contractual due process of law                   
established by the parties in the Constitution of the [LBPPR].”           
Id. at 12.                                                                

    The Plaintiffs filed a complaint on July 18, 2022, Pl.’s             
Compl. & Demand Jury Trial (“Compl.”) ECF No. 1 and bring the             
seven counts listed in the introduction.                                  
    The Defendants moved to dismiss this complaint for failure           
to state a claim on September 12, 2022, Def’s. Mot. FSC, and              
then again on October 27, 2022 for lack of subject matter                 
jurisdiction.  Def’s. Mot. SMJ.                                           
    Def’s. Mot. FSC was met with an opposition by the                    
Plaintiffs filed on October 12, 2022, Pls.’ Opp’n FSC, ECF No.            
40.   Def’s. Mot. SMJ was met with an opposition by the                   
Plaintiffs filed on November 10, 2022, Pls.’ Opp’n SMJ, ECF No.           
49.  The Defendants filed a reply on December 2, 2022, Def.’s             

Reply SMJ, ECF No. 53.  On March 29, 2023, the Court heard                
argument on the motion to dismiss and took the matter under               
advisement.  See Electronic Clerk’s Notes, ECF No. 79                     
    B.   Factual Background                                              
         1.   Facts Alleged Relating to the Antirust Claims              


                                                                         
    The Defendant, League, is “the only top-tier professional            
baseball league in Puerto Rico, currently consisting of six               
different franchise teams operated by separately owned investors          
who do not share profits and losses with each other.” Compl. ¶            
1.  As well as competing on the field, the teams compete “for             

fans, in-person attendance, player talent, sponsorships,                  
merchandise sales, radio, and streaming broadcast rights                  
agreements.” Id.                                                          
    The Complaint challenges, under both federal and Puerto              
Rico antitrust laws, “concerted behavior in unreasonable                  
restraint of trade through which the Defendants entered into an           
unlawful conspiracy to boycott and exclude the Plaintiffs from            
competing as participants in the relevant markets for investing           
in and operating top-tier professional baseball teams in Puerto           
Rico.”  Id. ¶ 2                                                           
    The prologue to this alleged behavior is the purchase of             
operating control of Cangrejeros de Santurce professional                 

baseball team (the “Cangrejeros Franchise”) by Axon in October            
2019.  Axon became the sole owner and member on February 4,               
2022.  Id. ¶ 3.  Axon went on to improve the “competitive                 
success of the Cangrejeros Franchise through increased levels of          
investment and dynamic new ways to operate and promote the team           
in economic competition.”  Id.  Axon’s “procompetitive efforts            
to improve the quality of the Cangrejeros Franchise were met              
                                                                         
with stiff resistance by the other teams in the League, who did           
not want to have to face such enhanced economic competition.”             
Id. ¶ 5.  This resistance was allegedly characterized by a                
“group boycott” and the “unlawful seizure of [the] Plaintiffs’            
investor-operator interest in the Cangrejeros Franchise, which            

was then resold to a different investor-operator, [the]                   
Defendant Impulse Sports Entertainment Corporation (‘Impulse              
Sports’).”  Id.                                                           
    This alleged collective boycott took the form of “unlawful           
contracts, combinations, and/or conspiracies” that had the                
effect of “unreasonably restraining competition and creating and          
maintaining a monopoly for [the] Defendants in the relevant               
markets for investing in and operating top-tier professional              
baseball teams in Puerto Rico.”  Id. ¶ 6.  This conduct led to            
“significant antitrust injuries to [the] Plaintiffs in their              
business and property.”  Id.  These injuries are represented by           
“the loss of [the] Plaintiffs’ ability to derive competitive              

value from the ticket sales, sponsorship, concessions,                    
merchandise, and radio and streaming broadcast rights of the              
Cangrejeros Franchise, and the loss of the ability to compete in          
the relevant markets through the operation of a professional              
baseball team in Puerto Rico.”  Id. ¶ 94.                                 
         2.   Facts Relating to Alleged Violations of the Civil          
              Rights Act of 1871, 42 U.S.C. § 1983.                      
                                                                         
    The Plaintiffs allege the Defendants “conspired with one             
another and co-conspirator Romero Lugo, [the Mayor of San Juan]           
acting on behalf of the municipality of San Juan, to deprive              
Plaintiffs, without due process of law, of their property                 
interests and rights, privileges, and immunities secured by the           

United States Constitution and laws of the United States under            
the color of government action by a municipality of Puerto                
Rico.” Compl. ¶ 159.  Essentially, the conspiracy allegedly               
“deprived Axon and Cangrejeros LLC, without any due process or            
compensation, of their established property interest in being             
the investor-operator of the Cangrejeros Franchise and having             
control over the commercial exploitation of the team’s various            
rights without affording them compensation or due process of              
law.”  Id.  They did so to “accomplish the objective of San Juan          
to suppress requests by the Franchise for various improvements            
in its stadium, to suppress the proposal for a private                    
investment in the stadium, and to eliminate the possibility that          

the team would move to another municipality in Puerto Rico.”              
Id. ¶ 160.                                                                
 II.  ANALYSIS                                                           
    The Defendants move to dismiss the complaint for lack of             
subject matter jurisdiction on three grounds.  First, the                
Plaintiffs’ antitrust claims must be dismissed because the               

                                                                         
“business of baseball” is exempt from antitrust regulation and           
the Puerto Rico Professional Baseball League falls squarely              
within the core of baseball’s antitrust exemption.  Def’s. Mot.          
SMJ 6-10.  Second, the Defendants argue the Plaintiffs’ state            
claims are barred by the Supremacy Clause and the Commerce               

Clause.  Id. at 13.  Finally, the Defendants argue that the              
Plaintiffs’ unfair competition law and tort claims fail as               
matter of law. Id. at 15-17.                                             
    A.   Standard of Review                                              
    As courts of limited jurisdiction, federal courts must               
resolve questions related to their subject-matter jurisdiction            
before addressing the merits of a case.  Destek Grp. v. State of          
N.H. Pub. Utils. Comm'n, 318 F.3d 32, 38 (1st Cir. 2003).  The            

party asserting jurisdiction has “the burden of demonstrating             
the existence of federal jurisdiction.”  Viqueira v. First Bank,          
140 F.3d 12, 16 (1st Cir. 1998).  If it appears to the Court at           
any time that it lacks the statutory or constitutional power to           
adjudicate the case, it must dismiss the action, even in the              
absence of a challenge from any party.  Arbaugh v. Y&H Corp.,             
546 U.S. 500, 514, (2006); Nowak v. Ironworkers Local 6 Pension           
Fund, 81 F.3d 1182, 1187 (2d Cir. 1996).                                  
    Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1) limns the                   
appropriate mechanism for challenging a court’s subject-matter            

                                                                         
jurisdiction.  Valentín v. Hosp. Bella Vista, 254 F.3d 358, 362           
(1st Cir. 2001).  The rule serves as a “large umbrella,                   
overspreading a variety of different types of challenges to               
subject-matter jurisdiction.”  Id. at 362–63.  A motion to                
dismiss brought under Rule 12(b)(1) is subject to a similar               

standard of review as a motion brought pursuant to Rule                   
12(b)(6).  Boada v. Autoridad de Carreteras y Transportación,             
680 F. Supp. 2d 382, 384 (D.P.R. 2010) (citing Negrón–Gaztambide          
v. Hernández–Torres, 35 F.3d 25, 27 (1st Cir. 1994)).  The                
district court “must credit the plaintiff’s well-pled factual             
allegations and draw all reasonable inferences in the                     
plaintiff’s favor.”  Merlonghi v. United States, 620 F.3d 50, 54          
(1st Cir. 2010) (citing Hosp. Bella Vista, 254 F.3d at 363).              
“[T]he Court’s inquiry, however, is not necessarily limited to            
the parties' pleadings, and may include whatever evidence has             
been presented in the case.”  Fed. Deposit Ins. Corp. v. Caban-           
Muñiz, 216 F. Supp. 3d 255, 257 (D.P.R. 2016) (citing Aversa v.           

United States, 99 F.3d 1200, 1210 (1st Cir. 1996)).                       
    B. The Plaintiffs’ Antitrust Claims Must Be Dismissed                
      Because the “Business of Baseball” is Exempt From                  
      Antitrust Regulation.                                              

    The Defendants argue the Plaintiffs’ antitrust claims must           
be dismissed because the “business of baseball” is exempt from            
antitrust regulation.  Def’s. Mot. SMJ at 6-10.                           
                                                                         
    The Plaintiffs oppose this motion on the basis that what             
they call “the MLB exemption” does not apply to this case.  They          
argue first that the anomalous MLB exemption must be narrowly             
construed and can only be applied to MLB and its affiliated               
minor leagues.  Pls.’ Opp’n SMJ at 5-6.  Second, that the                 

Defendants cannot invoke the MLB exemption as the league                  
operates as an independent baseball league that is not a minor            
league affiliate of MLB.  Id. at 8-10.  Third, that the conduct           
alleged does not fall within the narrow confines of the                   
“business of baseball,” and finally, that the Defendants also             
cannot qualify for the MLB exemption because there is no showing          
that they have relied on the existence of the exemption.  Id. at          
10-13.                                                                    
              1. The Puerto Rico Professional Baseball League            
              Falls Squarely Within the Core of Baseball’s               
              Antitrust Exemption.                                       
    The Defendants start their argument by setting forth the             
1922 Supreme Court decision that held that “the Clayton and               
Sherman Acts do not govern the business of baseball. Fed.                 
Baseball Club, Inc. v. Nat’l League of Prof’l Baseball Clubs,             
259 U.S. 200 (1922).”  Def.’s Mot. SMJ at 7.  The Defendants              
emphasize that the plaintiff in that case was “Federal Baseball,          
the last remaining club in the Federal League (and not Major              
League Baseball).”  Id.  They further continue to list the                
sustained holding in Supreme Court decisions, emphasizing “the            
                                                                         
U.S. Supreme Court has repeatedly held that the antitrust                 
exemption applies to the ‘business of baseball.’”  Id. at 10.             
    The Plaintiffs disagree on this crucial aspect and instead           
consider that “the exemption covers only MLB and its minor                
league affiliates and thus does not extend to the League or the           

Franchise Defendants.”  Pls.’ Opp’n SMJ 5.                                
    The Plaintiffs’ and the Defendants’ acknowledgement of the           
exemption differs first in their appellation of it.  The                  
Defendants name it throughout their motion and opposition as the          
“baseball antitrust exemption” while the Plaintiffs call it the           
“MLB exemption”. Def’s. Mot. FSC; Def.’s Mot. SMJ; Pls.’ Opp’n            
FSC; Pls.’ Opp’n SMJ.  Words matter.  As Holmes said, “[a] word           
is not a crystal, transparent and unchanged, it is the skin of a          
living thought and may vary greatly in color and content                  
according to the circumstances and the time in which it is                
used.” Towne v. Eisner, 245 U.S. 418, 425(1918).  The                     
Plaintiffs’ naming is telling: their main argument is that the            

exemption applies to MLB and its minor leagues only, and                  
“[b]ecause it is established that the MLB exemption can only be           
applied to MLB and its official minor league affiliates—and no            
other sports business—Defendants may not invoke it to protect             
their anticompetitive conduct here.”  Pls.’ Opp’n SMJ 8.  The             
Plaintiffs do not advance any cases to sustain their claim that           
the applicability of the clause only to MLB and its official              
                                                                         
minor leagues is “established.”  In fact, an exhaustive search            
throughout all federal courts in this country does not provide            
for a single case using the denomination “MLB exemption”.                 

    No federal courts have ever (before this case) expressly             
had to draw a distinction as to the applicability of this clause          
to professional leagues that are non-MLB or Minor League                  
affiliates.  Thus, this analysis focuses on interpreting the              
language and semantics of the major Supreme Court cases that              
define this exemption.                                                    
    In the famous 1972 case brought by baseball player Curt              
Flood, the Supreme Court named the exemption as follows: “The             
longstanding exemption of professional baseball from the                  
antitrust laws, Federal Baseball Club v. National League, 259             

U.S. 200 (1922); Toolson v. New York Yankees, Inc., 346 U.S. 356          
(1953) . . . .”  Flood v. Kuhn, 407 U.S. 258 (1972) (emphasis             
added).                                                                   
    Its predecessor, the 1953 Toolson case heard by the same             
Court, affirmed its earlier ruling in Federal Baseball Club of            
Baltimore v. National League of Professional Baseball Clubs, 259          
U.S. 200, holding: “[T]his Court held that the business of                
providing public baseball games for profit between clubs of               
professional baseball players was not within the scope of the             
federal antitrust laws.”  346 U.S. 356, at 357 (emphasis added).          

                                                                         
    The wording is clear: the antitrust exemption applies to             
professional baseball.  Had the Cangrejeros team, a professional          
baseball team, and the Winter League been an amateur team, the            
non-applicability of the exemption could have been better                 
supported.  Even with amateur baseball, however, the District             

Court of Puerto Rico has been hesitant on the non-applicability           
of the clause when amateur players were paid a salary:                    
    The only hesitation this Court has in a blanket                      
    application of the exemption is that the Supreme Court               
    has expressly limited it to professional baseball,                   
    holding “we now specifically limit the rule there                    
    established [in Federal Baseball] to the facts there                 
    involved, i.e. the business of organized professional                
    baseball.” Radovich v. National Football League, 352                 
    U.S. 445, 451-452 (1957). In addition, the First                     
    Circuit has construed Flood, the Supreme Court’s most                
    recent pronouncement on the exemption, as “holding                   
    that the longstanding judicially created exemption of                
    professional baseball from the Sherman Act is an                     
    established ‘aberration’ in which Congress has                       
    acquiesced.” Data General Corp. v. Grumman Systems                   
    Support Corp., 36 F.3d 1147, 1185 n.4 (1st Cir. 1994)                
    (emphasis added).                                                    

    Although the Federation is allegedly an amateur                      
    organization, because its players are paid a salary as               
    per the complaint, and because it is not clear that AA               
    baseball is purely an amateur gig, the exemption for                 
    pro-ball may well be applicable. Having already                      
    determined that there is no subject matter                           
    jurisdiction under the Sherman Act, however, the Court               
    declines to decide whether the exemption applies.                    

Melendez v. Federacion de Beisbol Aficionado de Puerto Rico,              
Civil No. 05-1040 (PG), 2005 WL 8213102, at *3 (D. P.R. Feb. 11,          
2005) (Pèrez-Gimènez, J.).                                                
                                                                         
    In their complaint, the Plaintiffs leave no doubt as to the          
professional nature of the Cangrejeros team: “Defendant Liga de           
Béisbol Profesional de Puerto Rico, Inc., (the “League”) is the           
only top-tier professional baseball league in Puerto Rico,                
currently consisting of six different franchise teams operated            

by separately owned investors who do not share profits and                
losses with each other.”  Compl. ¶ 1.  “In October 2019, Axon,            
through Cangrejeros LLC, purchased operating control of the               
Cangrejeros de Santurce professional baseball team (the                   
“Cangrejeros Franchise”).”  Id. ¶ 3.  Thus, the baseball                  
exemption is applicable to Cangrejeros de Santurce, a                     
professional baseball team.                                               
    The Plaintiffs further argue that “[e]ven if the Court               
finds that the MLB exemption can be extended to the League and            
its members . . ., the conduct averred in the Complaint still             
falls outside of the ‘business of baseball’ to which the Supreme          
Court has limited the exemption,” Pls.’ Opp’n SMJ 10, and                 

contend that “[h]ere, the anticompetitive conspiracy alleged              
does not involve conduct that is ‘central’ to operating a                 
baseball league.  To the contrary, [the] Plaintiffs have alleged          
a conspiracy between the League, the Mayor of San Juan, and the           
Franchise Defendants for the anticompetitive purpose of                   
suppressing competition by ‘[removing] Plaintiffs from operating          
the Cangrejeros Franchise.’”  Id. at 11 (citing Compl. ¶ 50).             
                                                                         
    The Defendants argue in turn that the alleged conspiracy             
falls within the “business of baseball” and sets forth several            
cases to support their argument.  They start by laying out that           
“the Supreme Court intended to exempt the business of baseball,           
not any particular facet of that business, from the federal               

antitrust laws.”  Charles O. Finley & Co., Inc. v. Kuhn, 569              
F.2d 527, 541 (7th Cir. 1978).  They then turn to two cases               
alleging collusion, where the Supreme Court declined to hear              
challenges to the antitrust exemption.                                    
    In the first case, owners of buildings with rooftop views            
of a professional baseball team's field brought action against            
the team, alleging the team was engaging in anti-competitive              
behavior and had breached a contract with the building owners             
when they began construction that would block views of the                
baseball field from the buildings' rooftops.  Right Field                 
Rooftops, LLC v. Chicago Baseball Holdings, LLC, 87 F. Supp. 3d           
874 (N.D. Ill. 2015).  The Rooftops argued that the baseball              

exemption did not apply to individual team franchises, and that           
if it did, the exemption did not apply here because the                   
Rooftops’ business was “not necessary to produce the game on the          
field.”  Id. at 884.  The Court laid out that “[t]he Rooftops'            
first contention that the baseball exemption is inapplicable to           
individual team franchises is unsupported by the relevant case            
law.  The Toolson defendants themselves included the New York             
                                                                         
Yankees, the Cincinnati Baseball Club, and both the owner and             
general manager of the Cincinnati club.”  Id.  Further, the               
Court laid out that “[m]ore fundamentally, . . . the Rooftops'            
reading of the baseball exemption is overly narrow.  The                  
exemption applies to the ‘business of baseball’ in general, not           

solely those aspects related to baseball's unique                         
characteristics and needs.” Id.                                           
    The second case was brought by scouts that argued that MLB           
was colluding to keep the scouts’ salaries low because teams              
were agreeing to not hire scouts already employed by other                
teams.  Wyckoff v. Office of the Comm'r of Baseball, 211 F.               
Supp. 3d 615 (S.D.N.Y. 2016).  Citing a previous case involving           
the Chicago Cubs the Wyckoff Court observed:                              
    In that case, the court denied plaintiffs' application               
    for a preliminary injunction on the grounds that the                 
    baseball exemption barred a challenge to the Chicago                 
    Cubs' alleged agreement with others to sell tickets to               
    watch Cubs games from rooftops overlooking Wrigley                   
    Field. Id. at 884–85. In denying plaintiff's                         
    application, the court concluded that the leading                    
    Supreme Court cases broadly exempt the “business of                  
    baseball”—not discrete aspects of that business—from                 
    antitrust regulation. Id.                                            

Id. at 625 (citing Right Field Rooftops, 87 F. Supp. 3d at 884-           
85).  Here, the Plaintiffs claims involve an alleged conspiracy           
involving an owner of a professional franchise that was                   
dismissed under the League’s regulations.  This involves the              
business of baseball.                                                     
                                                                         
    The Plaintiffs argument that “[t]he alleged conspiracy has           
nothing to do with player rules, rules of the game, or any other          
League rule or bylaw that could even arguably fall within the             
‘business of baseball’ as that term has been narrowly defined by          
the court to limit the scope of the MLB exemption,” Pls.’ Opp’n           

SMJ 12, is overly narrow, as was the Rooftop’s reading of the             
exemption in the Right Field Rooftops case.                               
    The Sherman Act baseball exemption applies to the LBPPR and          
the Cangrejeros team since they are a professional baseball               
team, and the antitrust claims arise in the context of the                
business of baseball.                                                     
    The baseball exemption bars any federal antitrust claims             
issued from the complaint, leading to dismissal of count one and          
count two.  Count three, count four and count five, alleging              
state antitrust claims, are consequently dismissed based on the           
Supremacy Clause as the Supreme Court held in Flood “state                
antitrust regulation would conflict with federal policy and . .           

. national ‘uniformity (is required) in any regulation of                 
baseball.’” 407 U.S. at 284 (quoting Flood v. Kuhn, 316 F. Supp.          
217, 280 (S.D.N.Y. 1970)).                                                
    This Court’s subject matter jurisdiction over this case              
could thus only be exercised through count seven, which claims            
Violations of Civil Rights Act of 1871, 42 U.S.C. § 1983, and             

                                                                         
could confer supplemental jurisdiction on count six, claiming             
Contracts in Prejudice of a Third Person.                                 

    C. “Judge shopping ain’t a thing here or anywhere else.”4            
      The Plaintiffs’ Claim of Violations of Civil Rights  Act           
      of 1871, 42 U.S.C. § 1983 Must be Dismissed Under the              
      Doctrine of Res Judicata.                                          

    While the central element of this Complaint revolves around          
the antitrust injuries that the Plaintiffs allegedly suffered,            
this Court may also exercise its subject matter jurisdiction              
through count seven alleging violations of Civil Rights Act of            
1871, 42 U.S.C. § 1983.  The Plaintiffs’ claim that the                   
Defendants “conspired with one another and co-conspirator Romero          
Lugo, [the Mayor of San Juan] acting on behalf of the                     
municipality of San Juan, to deprive Plaintiffs, without due              
process of law, of their property interests and rights,                   
privileges, and immunities secured by the United States                   
Constitution and laws of the United States under the color of             
government action by a municipality of Puerto Rico,” Compl. ¶             
159, and “deprived Axon and Cangrejeros LLC, without any due              
process or compensation, of their established property interest           
in being the investor-operator of the Cangrejeros Franchise and           
having control over the commercial exploitation of the team’s             

    4 Blue Sphere, Inc. v. Individuals, Corporations, etc. Civil         
Action No. 22-cv-5599, Jan. 18, 2023, transcript at 7 (N.D.Ill.           
2023)(Seager, J.).                                                        
                                                                         
various rights without affording them compensation or due                 
process of law.” Id.  They did so to “accomplish the objective            
of San Juan to suppress requests by the Franchise for various             
improvements in its stadium, to suppress the proposal for a               
private investment in the stadium, and to eliminate the                   

possibility that the team would move to another municipality in           
Puerto Rico.” Id. ¶ 160.                                                  
    In their motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim,             
the Defendants argued that “Plaintiffs’ action is barred by Res           
Judicata after [P]laintiffs lost their prior case filed in the            
local court of Puerto Rico.”  Def’s. Mot. FSC 10.  This Court is          
therefore “called upon to determine the preclusive effect of a            
judgment entered by the Puerto Rico Court of First Instance[,             
and] Puerto Rico law supplies the rule of decision.”  R.G. Fin.           
Corp. v. Vergara-Nuñez, 446 F.3d 178, 182–83 (1st Cir. 2006)              
(citing Pérez-Guzmán v. Gracia, 346 F.3d 229, 233-234 (1st Cir.           
2003)).                                                                   

    The doctrine of res judicata in Puerto Rico is inscribed in          
the Civil Code:                                                           
    In order that the presumption of res adjudicata may be               
    valid in another suit, it is necessary that, between                 
    the case decided by the sentence and that in which the               
    same is invoked, there be the most perfect identity                  
    between the things, causes, and persons of the                       
    litigants, and their capacity as such.                               

                                                                         
P.R. Laws Ann. tit. 31, § 3343.  Thus, “a party asserting a res           
judicata defense under Puerto Rico law must establish three               
elements: (i) the existence of a prior judgment on the merits             
that is ‘final and unappealable’; (ii) a perfect identity of              
thing or cause between both actions; and (iii) a perfect                  

identity of the parties and the capacities in which they acted.”          
R.G. Fin. Corp., 446 F.3d at 183 (citing Boateng v. InterAm.              
Univ., Inc., 210 F.3d 56, 61–62 (1st Cir. 2000)).                         
         1.   The Prior Judgment                                         
    The Defendants point out that “[o]n May 5, 2022, the San             
Juan Superior Court issued its Final Judgment,”  Def’s. Mot. FSC          
4, and that this is a final judgement because “[s]ince May 23,            
2022, to today, [P]laintiffs never sought review or other relief          

from the San Juan Superior Court’s judgment, which is now firm            
and final.”  Id. at 5.                                                    
     The Supreme Court has held that “issues actually litigated          
in a state-court proceeding are entitled to the same preclusive           
effect in a subsequent federal § 1983 suit as they enjoy in the           
courts of the State where the judgment was rendered.”  Migra v.           
Warren City Sch. Dist. Bd. of Educ., 465 U.S. 75, 83 (1984)               
(citing Allen v. McCurry, 449 U.S. 90, 96 (1980)).                        
Consequently, if perfect identity of the thing or cause between           


                                                                         
both actions is established, the State Court Judgement will               
preclude this claim.                                                      
         2. The Perfect Identity of Thing or Cause Between Both          
           Actions                                                       

     “A prior and current action will share a perfect identity           
of thing if they involve the same object or matter and will               
share a perfect identity of cause if they flow from the same              
principal ground or origin or, put another way, if they derive            
from a common nucleus of operative facts.”  Universal Ins. Co.            
v. Office of the Ins. Comm'r, 755 F.3d 34, 38 (1st Cir. 2014)             
(citing García–Monagas v. De Arellano, 674 F.3d 45, 51 (1st Cir.          
2012)).  The Defendants argue that “[b]oth the prior local court          
case as well as this case arise because of Axon’s suspension              
from the LBPPR”.  Def.’s Mot. FSC 11.  They conclude their                
argument by stating that “[w]hile it could be argued that both            
cases are based on the same set of facts, at the very least both          
cases derive from a common nucleus of operative facts.” Id.               
    The Plaintiffs argue that “[e]ven a cursory comparison of            
the claims in the narrow Superior Court Action to the very                
different claims in the instant action makes it evident that              
‘broader and more far-reaching’ conduct has been alleged here.”           
Pls.’ Opp’n FSC 13 (citing Walsh v. Int’l Longshoremen’s Ass’n.,          
630 F.2d 864, 873 (1st Cir. 1980)).  They consider the Superior           

Court Action to be “a simple breach of contract action                    
                                                                         
challenging, as a violation of the League’s Constitution, the             
League’s imposition of a two-year suspension and a $5,000 fine            
on Axon,” id., while describing the current action as “a wide-            
ranging case bringing federal antitrust and civil rights                  
conspiracy claims, as well as Puerto Rico unfair competition and          

antitrust claims, that were not in any way presented in the               
Superior Court Action.”  Id. at 13-14.                                    
    The Plaintiffs conflate similarity of cases and similarity           
of claims.  This Court does not have to consider the preclusive           
effect of the Superior Court Judgement on the entire case                 
brought before it, but the preclusive effect on the cause of              
action that bears “perfect identity” of thing or cause between            
actions.  See P.R. Laws Ann. tit. 31, § 3343.                             
    Turning to the complaint, and focusing solely on the claim           
of Violations of Civil Rights Act of 1871, 42 U.S.C. § 1983, the          
Plaintiffs allege that the “Defendants’ conspiracy, with the              
participation of the mayor of San Juan acting on behalf of the            

municipality, deprived Axon and Cangrejeros LLC, without any due          
process or compensation, of their established property interest           
in being the investor-operator of the Cangrejeros Franchise and           
having control over the commercial exploitation of the team’s             
various rights without affording them compensation or due                 
process of law.” Compl. ¶ 159.  Essentially, this deprivation of          
the “property interest in being the investor-operator of the              
                                                                         
Cangrejeros Franchise” takes the form of Axon’s suspension from           
his role, the same grievance at the center of the action brought          
to the Superior Court, and for which the court concluded that             
such suspension was in compliance with “the contractual due               
process of the law established by the parties in the                      

Constitution of the Professional Baseball League.”  Axon v. Liga          
De Beisbol Professional de Puerto Rico, Inc., NO. SJ-2022-CV-             
02802 at 12.                                                              
    In the Superior Court Judgment, the Court itself compared,           
in Nostradamus fashion, the contractual due process case brought          
before it with a potential constitutional due process claim had           
there been a state actor involved:                                        
    The Court must express, first, that the Professional                 
    Baseball League is a private entity. As it is well                   
    known, unless a private entity is an actor of the                    
    state, rights such as the constitutional due process                 
    of the law cannot be claimed against it. In such                     
    cases, the Supreme Court has reiterated that                         
    contractual due process of the law is what applies.                  
    This essentially means that if the parties established               
    by contract a specific procedure to sanction one of                  
    the parties, the procedure established by contract                   
    must be followed. This makes sense because the                       
    doctrine of pacta sunt servanda applies. However, in                 
    this case, the Court must analyze whether the                        
    procedure to impose sanctions that the President of                  
    the Professional Baseball League carried out against                 
    Mr. Axon is the correct one, pursuant to the contract                
    between the parties.                                                 

Id. at 10                                                                 

    At the heart of both claims lies Axon’s suspension and then          
termination by the Professional Baseball League.  After failing           
                                                                         
in State Court, under the theory of contractual due process, the          
Plaintiffs attempt to bring the same claim again under a                  
different theory by adding the Mayor, a state actor, to their             
complaint.                                                                
    This Court agrees that at the very least, both claims                

derive from a common nucleus of operative facts.  It is                   
satisfied that the perfect identity of thing or cause between             
both actions is present here.                                             
         3. Identity of the Parties                                      
    The Plaintiffs argue first “it cannot be disputed that the           
parties involved in this action are not identical to the parties          
in the Superior Court Action. In total, there are six new                 
Defendants in this action (Criollos Management, Inc., RA12,               
Inc., Indios de Mayaguez Baseball Club Inc., Gigantes de                  
Carolina Baseball Club Inc., Leones De Ponce CF Inc. and Impulse          
Sports) as well as a new Plaintiff (Santurce Merchandising LLC)           
who were not parties to the Superior Court Action.”  Pls.’ Opp’n          

FSC 15.  Second, they argue that “Defendants have made no                 
attempt to show that any of the new Defendants in this action             
were in privity with any of the parties in the prior action.”             
Id.                                                                       
    The Plaintiffs, however, fail to recognize that “under               
Puerto Rico law, the addition of new defendants to the federal            
claim does not destroy the defendants' ability to raise the res           
                                                                         
judicata defense.”  Rivera-Feliciano v. State Ins. Fund Corp.,            
652 F. Supp. 2d 170, 181 (D.P.R. 2009) (Pérez-Giménez, J.)                
(citing Baez-Cruz v. Municipality of Comerio, 140 F.3d 24, 29             
(1st Cir. 1998)).  In another case, the same argument made by             
plaintiffs was met with the same response: “Plaintiffs point out          

that the present action contains new parties that were not                
parties in the Commonwealth Court action.  Nevertheless, the              
defense of res judicata is applied even when the named parties            
are different, as long as the real parties in interest are                
identical.”  Lugo Rodriguez v. Puerto Rico Inst. of Culture, 221          
F. Supp. 2d 229, 238 (D.P.R. 2002) (Garcia-Gregory, J.), aff'd,           
98 F. App'x 15 (1st Cir. 2004) (citing Arecibo Radio Corp. v.             
Commonwealth, 825 F.2d 589, 591 (1st Cir. 1987)).                         
    Here, the real parties of interest in the Civil Rights Act           
Claim, triggered by Axon’s suspension, are Axon and CSBC, who             
filed the action in the Commonwealth Court and in this Court              
against the unlawful conduct of LBPPR and Flores in his official          

capacity as President of the League and his personal capacity.            
    Plaintiffs fail to demonstrate that res judicata cannot              
apply.  The Civil Rights Act claim stands alone and is not                
intertwined with the antitrust claims.  This Court is satisfied           
that the Commonwealth Judgment precludes the federal claim                
through the doctrine of res judicata.                                     

                                                                         
 III.  CONCLUSION                                                        
    Over 100 years ago, and again 50 years ago, the Supreme              

Court declined to intervene in what it considered to be a                 
congressional responsibility.  “[T]he Court said in Federal               
Baseball in 1922 and what it said in Toolson in 1953, we say              
again here in 1972: the remedy, if any is indicated, is for               
congressional, and not judicial, action.”  Flood, 407 U.S. at             
285.  The Supreme Court also said that “[Congress] by its                 
positive inaction, has allowed those decisions to stand for so            
long and, far beyond mere inference and implication, has clearly          
evinced a desire not to disapprove them legislatively.”  Id.              
    Decades after acknowledging that these decisions have stood          
for “so long,” it is now apparent that a congressional                    

intervention is unlikely.  The Supreme Court may well need to             
take responsibility itself, or risk issuing the same decision in          
a century.  Until then, district courts have no other choice but          
to apply the antitrust exemption to Professional Baseball.                
    This Court does not have jurisdiction over the subject               
matter of this action pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §§ 1331 and 1337              
because the claims are exempt from Sections 4 and 16 of the               
Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 15 & 26), Sections 1 and 2 of the               
Sherman Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 1 & 2), and 42 U.S.C. §§ 1983 & 1988            
because of the professional baseball antitrust exemption.                 

                                                                         
    Therefore, this Court does not have supplemental                     
jurisdiction over the claims arising under the Puerto Rico                
antitrust law, P.R. Laws Ann. tit. 10, § 257, et seq., for                
violations of the Puerto Rico Fair Competition Law, P.R. Laws             
Ann. tit. 10, § 259, based on the Supremacy Clause.                       

    The Civil Rights Act Claim is precluded by a prior                   
judgement through the doctrine of res judicata and the Court              
declines to exercise supplemental authority on the state claim            
of Contracts in Prejudice of a Third Party under the Puerto Rico          
General Tort Statute, P.R. Laws Ann. tit. 31, § 10801.                    
    This Court GRANTS the Defendants’ motion to dismiss for              
lack of subject matter jurisdiction, ECF No. 43, with regard to           
the federal antitrust claims.  This Court GRANTS the Defendants’          
motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim, ECF No. 28,               
regarding the Civil Rights Act Claim through the doctrine of res          
judicata.                                                                 
                                       /s/ William G. Young              
                                          WILLIAM G. YOUNG               
                                              JUDGE                      
                                              of the                     
                                           UNITED STATES5                


    5 This is how my predecessor, Peleg Sprague (D. Mass. 1841-          
1865), would sign official documents.  Now that I’m a Senior              
District Judge I adopt this format in honor of all the judicial           
colleagues, state and federal, with whom I have had the                   
privilege to serve over the past 45 years.