UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                                              
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                                             



CAPITOL RECORDS, LLC, et al.,                                             



                Plaintiffs,                                             


                                      No. 09-CV-10101 (RA)              
             v.                                                         



VIMEO, LLC d/b/a VIMEO.COM, et al.,                                       



                Defendants.                                             
                                       OPINION & ORDER                  


EMI BLACKWOOD MUSIC, INC, et al.,                                         

                Plaintiff,                                              


             v.                                                         
                                      No. 09-CV-10105 (RA)              

VIMEO, LLC d/b/a VIMEO.COM, et al.,                                       

                Defendants.                                             


RONNIE ABRAMS, United States District Judge:                              
   Plaintiffs Capitol Records, LLC, Caroline Records, Inc., Virgin Records America, Inc., 
EMI Blackwood Music, Inc., EMI April Music, Inc., EMI Virgin Music, Inc., Colgems-EMI 
Music, Inc., EMI Virgin Songs, Inc., EMI Gold Horizon Music Corp., EMI Unart Catalog Inc., 
Jobete  Music  Co.,  Inc.,  Stone  Diamond  Music  Corporation,  and  EMI  U  Catalog,  Inc. 
(collectively, “Plaintiffs”) bring these copyright infringement actions against Defendants Vimeo, 
LLC and Connected Ventures, LLC (collectively, “Vimeo”).  This Court previously granted in 
part and denied in part the parties’ cross-motions for summary judgment and certified several 
questions  to  the  Second  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  for  an  interlocutory  appeal  pursuant  to 
28 U.S.C. § 1292(b).  The Court of Appeals accepted that appeal and affirmed in part and 
vacated in part this Court’s decision.  See Capitol Records, LLC v. Vimeo, LLC, 826 F.3d 78, 81 
(2d Cir. 2016), cert. denied, 137 S. Ct. 1374 (2017).  Now before the Court are the parties’ post-
remand  cross-motions  for  summary  judgment  on  the  question  of  whether  the  safe-harbor 
provision of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998 (“DMCA”) protects Vimeo from 

copyright liability.  For the reasons that follow, Plaintiffs’ motion is denied and Vimeo’s motion 
is granted in part and denied in part.                                    
                        BACKGROUND                                      
   The Court assumes familiarity with the factual background of this case, which has been 
recounted in the previous opinions of both this Court and the Second Circuit.  See Capitol 
Records, LLC v. Vimeo, LLC, 972 F. Supp. 2d 500, 504–07 (S.D.N.Y. 2013) (“Vimeo I”); 
Capitol Records, LLC v. Vimeo, LLC, 972 F. Supp. 2d 537, 542–43 (S.D.N.Y. 2013) (“Vimeo 
II”); Capitol Records, LLC v. Vimeo, LLC, 826 F.3d 78, 82–86 (2d Cir. 2016) (“Vimeo III”).  The 
Court here provides a brief overview of the procedural history that is relevant to the instant 
motions.                                                                  

   Defendants operate the website Vimeo.com, an internet platform that permits users to 
upload and share original videos.  Vimeo.com requires users to have participated in the creation 
of the videos that they upload.  Plaintiffs, record and music-publishing companies, initially 
brought this action against Defendants in 2009, alleging copyright infringement of musical 
recordings used in 199 videos that appeared on Vimeo’s website.  In 2013, Vimeo moved for 
summary judgment, asserting entitlement to safe-harbor protection under the DMCA.  Plaintiffs 
cross-moved for partial summary judgment, seeking a ruling that Vimeo was ineligible for the 
safe harbor.                                                              
   In September 2013, this Court granted in part and denied in part each party’s motion.  
Vimeo I, 972 F. Supp. 2d 500.  As relevant here, the Court granted summary judgment in favor 
of Vimeo on 144 of the videos, on the basis that the lack of record evidence that Vimeo 
employees had viewed them precluded a finding that they had acquired any knowledge of their 

infringing content.  Id. at 523.  As to the remaining 55 videos, the Court held that triable issues 
of fact existed concerning whether Vimeo had acquired either actual or “red flag” knowledge of 
copyright infringement, thereby disqualifying Vimeo from the safe harbor.  Id.  The Court 
further held, with respect to 10 of the remaining 55 videos that had been uploaded by Vimeo 
employees, that there were triable issues of fact regarding whether the videos had been uploaded 
by employees acting as agents of Vimeo (which would disqualify Vimeo from the safe harbor) or 
in their personal capacities (which would not).  Id. at 519.              
   On Vimeo’s motion for reconsideration, the Court granted summary judgment in favor of 
Vimeo on 17 additional videos.  Vimeo II, 972 F. Supp. 2d 537.  The Court concluded that there 
was insufficient evidence that Vimeo employees had watched 15 of the videos and that, with 

respect to two of the videos, the infringing activity—which consisted of playing a copyrighted 
song briefly in the background—was not “objectively obvious,” so as to disqualify Vimeo from 
protection under the safe harbor.  Id. at 545–46 (quoting Viacom Int’l, Inc. v. YouTube, Inc., 676 
F.3d  19,  31  (2d  Cir.  2012)).    As  to  the  remaining  videos  on  which  Vimeo  sought 
reconsideration—which  prominently  featured  recognizable  songs  by  well-known  artists  in 
essentially unaltered form—the Court held that genuine issues of fact existed concerning whether 
Vimeo had red flag knowledge of the videos’ infringing content.  Id. at 546–49.  The Court 
granted  Plaintiffs  leave  to  file  an  amended  complaint  alleging  1,476  new  instances  of 
infringement and granted Vimeo’s motion to certify two questions for interlocutory appeal.  As 
relevant  here,  one  of  those  certified  questions  was  “[w]hether,  under  Viacom  Int’l,  Inc.  v. 
YouTube, Inc., a service provider’s viewing of a user-generated video containing all or virtually 
all of a recognizable, copyrighted song may establish ‘facts or circumstances’ giving rise to ‘red 
flag’ knowledge of infringement.”  Id. at 556.                            

   On appeal, the Second Circuit answered that question in the negative.  Specifically, it 
held that “[a] copyright owner’s mere showing that a video posted by a user on the service 
provider’s site includes substantially all of a recording of recognizable copyrighted music, and 
that an employee of the service provider saw  at least some part of the user’s material, is 
insufficient to sustain the copyright owner’s burden of proving that the service provider had 
either actual or red flag knowledge of the infringement.”  Vimeo III, 826 F.3d at 86.  For videos 
where  employee  interaction  with  a  well-known  song  was  the  sole  indicator  of  red  flag 
knowledge, the Court of Appeals held that “Vimeo is entitled to summary judgment . . . as to the 
red flag knowledge issue, unless plaintiffs can point to evidence sufficient to carry their burden 
of proving that Vimeo personnel either knew the video was infringing or knew facts making that 

conclusion obvious to an ordinary person who had no specialized knowledge of music or the 
laws of copyright.”  Id. at 98.  The Second Circuit vacated this Court’s partial denial of Vimeo’s 
summary judgment motion and remanded for further consideration in light of its holding.   
   On  remand,  the  parties  renewed  their  cross-motions  for  summary  judgment  on  the 
applicability of the DMCA safe harbor and submitted supplemental briefing on the effect of the 
Circuit’s decision on the 307 videos that are now in dispute (the “Videos-in-Suit”).1 




1 Following remand, Plaintiffs identified 307 videos in which there was some evidence of Vimeo employee 
interaction, such as comments or likes.  See Dkt. 186 at 7.               
                      LEGAL STANDARD                                    
   “The court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine 
dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.”  Fed. 
R. Civ. P. 56(a).  The moving party bears the burden of demonstrating “the absence of a genuine 

issue of material fact.”  Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323 (1986).  On summary 
judgment, the Court must “construe all evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving 
party,  drawing  all  inferences  and  resolving  all  ambiguities  in  its  favor.”    Dickerson  v. 
Napolitano, 604 F.3d 732, 740 (2d Cir. 2010).  Where both parties move for summary judgment, 
as Plaintiffs and Vimeo have done here, “each party’s motion must be examined on its own 
merits, and . . . all reasonable inferences must be drawn against the party whose motion is under 
consideration.”  Morales v. Quintel Entm’t, Inc., 249 F.3d 115, 121 (2d Cir. 2001). 
                         DISCUSSION                                     
   Before the Court are the parties’ cross-motions for summary judgment as to the issue of 
whether Vimeo employees had “red flag” knowledge that the Videos-in-Suit were infringing. 

I.   The Applicable Legal Standard on Remand                              
A.      Defining Red Flag Knowledge                                     
   The DMCA creates a “compromise, which on the one hand, augments the protections 
available to copyright owners, and, on the other, insulates service providers from liability for 
infringements of which they are unaware . . . so as to make it commercially feasible to provide 
valuable Internet services to the public.”  Vimeo III, 826 F.3d at 82.  On the one hand, the 
DMCA  enhances  copyright  protection  by  establishing  a  “notice-and-takedown  regime”  that 
requires service providers to “‘expeditiously . . . remove . . . material that is claimed to be 
infringing.’”  Id. at 83 (quoting 17 U.S.C. § 512(c)(1)(C)).  On the other hand, it “expressly 
relieve[s] [internet service providers] of any obligation to monitor the postings of users to detect 
infringements as a  condition of qualifying for the safe harbor,” and immunizes them from 
copyright liability “if the service providers are unaware of the infringements.”  Id. at 83. 
   At issue in this case is the scope of the safe harbor established by § 512(c), which shields 

qualifying internet service providers from liability for copyright infringement “by reason of the 
storage at the direction of a user of material that resides on a system or network controlled or 
operated by or for the service provider,” if the service provider, among other things: 
   (A)(i) does not have actual knowledge that the material or an activity using the material 
   on the system or network is infringing;                              

   (ii) in the absence of such knowledge, is not aware of facts or circumstances from which 
   infringing activity is apparent; or                                  

   (iii) upon obtaining such knowledge or awareness, acts expeditiously to remove, or 
   disable access to, the material.                                     

17 U.S.C. § 512(C)(1)(A)(i)–(iii) (emphases added).                       

   In the event that infringing material has not been expeditiously removed from a site, the 
§ 512(c) safe harbor applies only if the service provider has neither “actual knowledge” of the 
infringing material nor “aware[ness] of facts or circumstances from which infringing activity is 
apparent”—otherwise known as “red flag” knowledge.  Id.  “[T]he red flag provision turns on 
whether  the  provider  was  subjectively  aware  of  facts  that  would  have  made  the  specific 
infringement ‘objectively’ obvious to a reasonable person.”  Viacom, 676 F.3d at 31.  The Vimeo 
III court further held that “[t]he hypothetical ‘reasonable person’ to whom infringement must be 
obvious is an ordinary person—not endowed with specialized knowledge or expertise concerning 
music or the laws of copyright.”  826 F.3d at 93–94.                      
   Pursuant to Vimeo III, the burden of proving such knowledge or expertise falls on the 
plaintiff.  As entitlement to the safe harbor “is properly seen as an affirmative defense,” the 
defendant bears the burden of demonstrating that it meets the statutory definition of an eligible 
service provider.  Id. at 94-95.  Nevertheless, the Circuit has made clear that “the burden of proof 
more appropriately shifts to the plaintiff” on the question of whether the service provider should 
be “disqualified” from the safe harbor based on accusations of misconduct—for example, by 

reason of failing to act after acquiring actual or red flag knowledge.  Id. at 94.  In articulating this 
standard, the Circuit cited with approval “the proposed allocation of shifting burdens of proof” in 
the Nimmer copyright treatise.  Id. at 94-95 (citing MELVILLE B. NIMMER & DAVID NIMMER, 
NIMMER ON COPYRIGHT § 12B.04[A][1][d] (2015)).                            
   Applying the above standard to the facts of this case, the Vimeo III court held that 
Plaintiffs could not meet their burden of proving that Vimeo had either actual or red flag 
knowledge of a particular instance of infringement merely by showing that “some employee of 
Vimeo had some contact with a user-posted video that played all, or nearly all, of a recognizable 
song.”  Id. at 97.  This was so, the Court of Appeals held, for numerous reasons, including that 
the  employee’s  viewing  may  have  been  brief  or  for  a  purpose  unrelated  to  detecting 

infringement, and that even “famous” music may not be recognizable to a hypothetical ordinary 
individual with no specialized knowledge of the field.  Id. at 96.  The Vimeo III court further 
stated that employees of service providers “cannot be expected to know how to distinguish, for 
example, between infringements and parodies that may qualify as fair use” or “how likely or 
unlikely it may be that the user who posted the material had authorization to use the copyrighted 
music.”  Id. at 97.  Consequently, viewing a video that incorporates a song known by the viewer 
to be copyrighted would not in itself result in red flag knowledge.  In the Circuit’s view, “[e]ven 
an employee who was  a copyright expert cannot be expected to know when the use of a 
copyrighted  song  has  been  licensed.”    Id.    Although  knowledge  of  fair-use  and  licensing 
principles cannot automatically be imputed to a service-provider employee, the Court of Appeals 
noted that “[i]t is of course entirely possible” that a Vimeo employee viewing a video “did have 
expertise or knowledge with respect to the market for music and the laws of copyright,” and that 
“[t]he employee may well have known that the work was infringing, or known facts that made 

this obvious.”  Id.                                                       
   The Court of Appeals acknowledged that, in light of its narrow reading of red flag 
knowledge, “the difference between actual knowledge of infringement under § 512(c)(1)(A)(i) 
and red flag knowledge under § 512(c)(1)(A)(ii) may not be vast.”  Id.  “Assuming this is so,” 
that court concluded, “it is of no significance.  The fact that Congress was unwilling to extend 
the safe harbor to circumstances where the service provider did not subjectively know that the 
posted material infringed, but did know facts that made infringement objectively obvious, does 
not compel the conclusion that Congress expected this extension to cover a large number of 
instances.”  Id.  The Nimmer copyright treatise thus characterizes the Vimeo III decision as 
having  “reduc[ed]  red  flags  almost  to  the  vanishing  point.”  NIMMER  ON  COPYRIGHT 

§ 12B.04[A][1][b][v][I] (2018).                                           
   B.   The Burden of Proof on Facts Giving Rise to Red Flag Knowledge  
   The parties agree that “[t]he burden of proof with respect to actual or red flag knowledge 
[is] on the plaintiff.”  Vimeo III, 826 F.3d at 95.  Plaintiffs also acknowledge that they bear the 
burden of raising a triable issue of fact as to whether Vimeo employees possessed facts that 
would  make  it  objectively  obvious  that  the  videos  incorporated  copyrighted  music.    They 
nonetheless dispute whether Plaintiffs must demonstrate that Vimeo employees were aware of 
facts that would demonstrate that the copyrighted music on user-generated videos was both 
unlicensed and did not constitute “fair use” of such content.  See Pls. Memo at 18-19 (referring 
to licensing and fair use as “hypothetical affirmative defenses”).        
   On  this  point,  Vimeo  III  was  clear.    Because  the  hypothetical  person  to  whom 
infringement must be objectively obvious is someone “not endowed with specialized knowledge 

or expertise concerning music or the laws of copyright,” Vimeo III, 826 F.3d at 93–94, a plaintiff 
seeking to surmount the safe harbor must adduce facts to demonstrate that the service-provider 
employee had a sufficient knowledge base to determine that a particular video obviously violated 
copyright law.  Among other things, therefore, Plaintiffs must adduce facts that the hypothetical 
ordinary individual “in fact recognized” the music contained in the video.  Id. at 96.   
   Mere  “awareness  that  a  user  posting  contains  copyrighted  music”  is,  however, 
insufficient for red flag knowledge, given the possibility that the user had authorization to use the 
copyrighted material or that it qualified as fair use.  Id. at 97.  Although the factual existence of a 
license or the applicability of fair use are generally treated as affirmative defenses, see Bourne v. 
Walt Disney Co., 68 F.3d 621, 630–31 (2d Cir. 1995) (licensing); Infinity Broad. Corp. v. 

Kirkwood, 150 F.3d 104, 107 (2d Cir. 1998) (fair use), the Second Circuit held that the burden of 
proof is re-allocated in the context of the DMCA safe harbor.  Because “the service provider is 
under no legal obligation to have its employees investigate to determine the answers to these 
questions,”  Vimeo  III,  826  F.3d  at  98,  the  burden  rests  with  Plaintiffs  to  show,  through 
affirmative evidence, that the Vimeo employee who interacted with a specific video knew of 
facts sufficient to determine that the use of copyrighted music was neither authorized nor fair. 
   Decisions issued subsequent to Vimeo III have thus required the plaintiff to bear the 
burden  of  demonstrating  that  service-provider  employees  are  able  to  distinguish  infringing 
content from authorized uses.  In EMI Christian Music Grp., Inc. v. MP3tunes, LLC, the Second 
Circuit held that a jury could reasonably conclude that the defendants had red flag knowledge 
about two categories of songs, “pre-2007 MP3s” and “Beatles songs.”  844 F.3d 79, 93 (2d Cir. 
2016).  The Circuit based its decision in large part on evidence that defendants knew that no 
licenses existed for these categories of songs.2  Evidence of defendants’ actual knowledge that 

the Beatles had “never authorized their songs to be available digitally” and that “there had been 
no legal online distribution of Beatles tracks before 2010, other than one track within a video 
game” provided sufficient support for the conclusion that the defendants’ mere awareness of a 
Beatles file on their site constituted red flag knowledge of infringement.  Id. at 93 (emphasis in 
original).  Judge Rakoff interpreted Vimeo III in a similar fashion in a copyright suit against the 
owners of the Huffington Post for hosting a self-published blog post that included a copyrighted 
photo bearing a New York Daily News credit.  See Downs v. Oath Inc., 385 F. Supp. 3d 298, 306 
(S.D.N.Y. 2019).  Because plaintiff had not demonstrated that the Huffington Post employee 
who “screened the article” would be able to “distinguish between infringements and fair and 
authorized uses,” even proof that she  was aware of the photo credit would be insufficient 

evidence of red flag knowledge, according to the standard articulated in Vimeo III.  Id. at 301, 
306-07.                                                                   
   In sum, to surmount the safe harbor on summary judgment, Plaintiffs must demonstrate 
that  Vimeo  employees  possessed  facts  that  would  enable  them  to  identify  the  presence  of 
copyrighted material in each of the Videos-in-Suit.  They also bear the burden of demonstrating 
that Vimeo employees knew how to distinguish infringement from fair or authorized use, and 
that they were able to do so for each Video-in-Suit.                      


2 The Court of Appeals did not address fair use in MP3tunes, LLC.  The infringing service in that case, however, 
simply hosted MP3 versions of copyrighted audio tracks.  As a result, the doctrine of fair use was plainly 
inapplicable.  See Capitol Records, LLC v. ReDigi Inc., 910 F.3d 649, 663 (2d Cir. 2018) (no fair use where 
defendant made identical copies of plaintiff’s copyrighted sound recordings). 
II.  Plaintiffs’ Evidence of Red Flag Knowledge                           
   On remand, Plaintiffs have largely failed to satisfy this burden.  As an initial matter, 
Plaintiffs have failed to produce evidence to suggest that the Vimeo employees who viewed the 
Videos-in-Suit possessed “expertise with respect to … the laws of copyright,” or with respect to 

the licensing practices of the artists whose music appears in the videos, that would allow them to 
detect copyright infringement.  Vimeo III, 826 F.3d at 97.  With respect to Videos-in-Suit 
uploaded by users that are unaffiliated with Vimeo, Plaintiffs have not demonstrated that any 
employee  who  viewed  a  Video-in-Suit  possessed  facts  sufficient  to  determine  whether  the 
copyrighted material incorporated therein was either authorized or qualified as fair use.  As to 
Videos-in-Suit that were uploaded or partially created by Vimeo employees, however, the Court 
finds that the question whether those  employees stored their content  as “users”  within the 
statutory definition or as employees acting within the scope of their employment precludes 
summary judgment in favor of Vimeo.                                       
   A.   Plaintiffs’ Evidence of Vimeo Employees’ General Knowledge of Copyright  
        Law and Licensing                                               

   Plaintiffs have not demonstrated that the Vimeo employees who interacted with the 
specific videos at issue possessed the knowledge, experience, and background to distinguish 
infringement from authorized or fair use.  The evidence, construed in the light most favorable to 
Plaintiffs, demonstrates only that some employees at the company were broadly familiar with the 
concept  of  copyright  and  that  there  was  some  general  awareness  within  the  company  that 
copyright infringement was occurring on Vimeo.com.   Neither showing is sufficient to raise a 
triable issue of fact as to red flag knowledge, considering Plaintiffs’ failure to impute this 
knowledge to the employees that screened the Videos-in-Suit.              
   Plaintiffs’  evidence  arguably  suffices  to  establish  that  Vimeo  executives  possessed 
particularized knowledge of copyright law.  In their depositions, present and former Vimeo 
executives Moshe Koyfman, Dae Mellencamp, and Jonathan Marcus discuss copyright concepts 
such  as  licensing  and  music  rights.    See  Dkt.  187,  Plaintiffs’  Post-Remand  Supplemental 

Statement of Undisputed Facts (“SSUF”) ¶ 145.  For example, Vimeo co-founder Jacob Lodwick 
commented that “big media companies might dispute our use of copyrighted music in our videos 
even if we (i.e., sane people) consider it fair use.”  Dkt. 88-1, Frackman Decl., Ex. 1 (Lodwick 
Dep.) at 52:22–53:2.  Former executive Marcus testified that he had conducted research on music 
licensing rates while at Vimeo.  SSUF ¶ 145.  Such testimony establishes that some Vimeo 
executives  were  familiar  with  the  ways  in  which  record  companies  collect  royalties  for 
commercial  utilization  of  music.    That  evidence  sheds  no  light,  however,  on  whether  the 
employees who screened the Videos-in-Suit had similar knowledge.          
   Nor is there evidence that Vimeo employees were aware of the likelihood that Vimeo 
users lacked the requisite authorization to use the content.  Plaintiffs have adduced evidence that 

Vimeo employees and executives acknowledged that the company had not licensed rights to 
either sound recordings or musical compositions.  See SSUF ¶ 1.  But there is no evidence in the 
record that Vimeo employees knew whether users were authorized to incorporate the content 
they uploaded.  There is similarly no evidence that Vimeo employees were aware of the licensing 
practices of the artists themselves.  In this respect, Plaintiffs highlight the following blog post by 
Vimeo employee Blake Whitman:                                             
   As many of you know, finding music for your videos can be somewhat . . . well, painful.  
   Licensing music on your own can be confusing and finding good free music can take 
   forever.  Many of us here at Vimeo are video creators or filmmakers as well and we 
   experience these frustrations on a regular basis.                    
SSUF ¶ 152.  The mere mention of licensing as a concept does not demonstrate any knowledge 
on Whitman’s part of the likelihood that specific users did or did not have authorization for the 
music in their videos.  Although Plaintiffs maintain that Vimeo employees had no reason to 
believe “that random users, who never claimed to have a license, would have one,” Pls. Memo at 

18, the Circuit has made clear that Plaintiffs bear the burden of proving knowledge of licensing 
practices.  Their failure to adduce any evidence establishing that Vimeo “knew that major music 
labels generally had not [] authorized their music to be distributed in the format … available on 
[Vimeo],” MP3tunes, LLC, 844 F.3d at 92, indicates that they have not satisfied this burden.  
   Other pieces of evidence proffered by Plaintiffs demonstrate that some employees knew 
that some videos contained copyrighted material.  Vimeo employee Julia Quinn posted on her 
Vimeo account profile: “I had to take down all my videos that had copyrighted music on them 
2/6/09.  Sorry.  :(  .”   SSUF  ¶  40.    Whitman  told  a  Vimeo  user  that  the  company’s  policy 
concerning the use of copyrighted music was “Don’t ask, don’t tell.”  Dkt. 88-7, Frackman Decl., 
Ex. 4. (Whitman Dep.) at 233:10-234:18.  Community Team member Dalas Verdugo similarly 

told a user that the company “allow[ed]” the use of copyrighted music but would take a video 
down if it received a “legal takedown notice.”  Dkt. 89-1, Frackman Decl., Ex. 4. (Vergudo 
Dep.) at 118:11-120:24.  None of these statements are probative of red flag knowledge under the 
standard articulated in Vimeo III.  As the Second Circuit reiterated in MP3tunes, LLC, “the 
DMCA does not impose ‘an amorphous obligation to take commercially reasonable steps in 
response to a generalized awareness of infringement.’”  844 F.3d at 92 (quoting Viacom, 676 
F.3d at 31).  Even if Vimeo did adopt a cavalier approach towards copyright infringement, that 
would not disqualify Vimeo from the safe harbor, because it does not demonstrate that it failed to 
act in the face of specific, “objectively obvious” instances of infringement.  
   None of this evidence, moreover, indicates whether employees were able to determine 
whether the incorporation of copyrighted music on a user-generated video could be considered 
fair use.   On that subject, Plaintiffs focus primarily on a company statement that  “Vimeo 
moderators remove videos that constitute clear violations [of copyright] when they are brought to 

our attention. . . .  Examples include rips of movies, television shows, and music videos – or the 
unauthorized use of a  popular song in the background of your video.”  See SSUF ¶ 168.  
Construed in the light most favorable to Plaintiffs, this statement indicates that Vimeo employees 
may have been able to determine that the fair-use doctrine did not apply in the obvious case, i.e., 
where  the  content  purportedly  generated  by  the  user  was  a  mere  facsimile  of  copyrighted 
material.  The evidence does not demonstrate, however, whether a Vimeo employee could 
distinguish “between infringements and parodies that may qualify as fair use” in the broader 
context of user-generated videos in which copyrighted music is somehow incorporated.  Vimeo 
III, 826 F.3d at 97.  The same is true of the allegation that “[Vimeo employees] knew and were 
educated on possible means of detecting copyrighted music in videos (although Vimeo refused to 

implement those means),” Pls. Memo. at 17, which refers to copyright-detecting technology 
whose implementation was contemplated by the company.  Because of the fair-use doctrine, the 
mere use of unlicensed, copyrighted music in a video segment is insufficient on its own to 
establish a violation of law.  See, e.g., Brown v. Netflix, Inc., No. 20-2007, 2021 WL 1976614 
(2d Cir. May 18, 2021) (segment of music featured in documentary film was fair use).  
   At most, Plaintiffs’ evidence permits an inference that some Vimeo employees may have 
been broadly familiar with concepts such as fair use.  Such evidence does not, on its own, permit 
the  Court  to  infer  that  this  knowledge  armed  employees  with  the  ability  to  distinguish 
infringements from authorized or fair use with respect to any of the Videos-in-Suit. 
   B.   Plaintiffs’ Evidence of Vimeo Employee Interactions with Videos Uploaded  
        by Unaffiliated Users                                           

   Plaintiffs’ failure to establish that Vimeo employees possessed, as a general matter, the 
“relevant knowledge and experience that informed the issue of red flag knowledge,” Pls. Memo 
at 14, does not necessarily entitle Vimeo to summary judgment.   Plaintiffs argue that the nature 
of the interactions between Vimeo employees and the Videos-in-Suit raises a triable issue of fact 
as to whether those employees became aware of facts that made infringement “objectively 
obvious.”  The Court is not persuaded that these interactions suffice to meet the stringent burden 
of proof required by Vimeo III.                                           
   Responding to the Second Circuit’s ruling that the mere viewing of video that contains a 
well-known  song  does  not  suffice  to  establish  red  flag  knowledge,  Plaintiffs  proffer  the 
following categories of employee interaction with the Videos-in-Suit:  tagging the video with 
music credits, liking and commenting on videos, “whitelisting” or “burying” videos, placing 
videos on a Vimeo-moderated channel, and inducing the creation of certain types of videos.  
Relatedly, Plaintiffs emphasize that Vimeo employees watched certain infringing videos with the 
express purpose of determining their compliance or noncompliance with the website’s terms of 
service.                                                                  
   These categories of evidence may well demonstrate that a Vimeo employee was aware of 
the content of a Video-in-Suit and that it was objectively obvious that such a video contained 

copyrighted music.   As explained  above, however, proof that the employees identified the 
presence of copyrighted material is a necessary but insufficient condition of red flag knowledge.  
See Vimeo III, 826 F.3d at 96-97.  These modes of interaction with infringing videos say nothing 
about the employee’s knowledge as to whether the use of such music was authorized or fair.  
They therefore do not suffice to show that Vimeo employees were aware of facts that would 
make infringement “objectively obvious” under the standard set forth in Vimeo III—whether  
considered separately or in tandem.  The same deficiency applies to the other type of evidence 
proffered by Plaintiffs, that certain Videos-in-Suit were uploaded after Plaintiffs sent a cease-
and-desist letter and filed the instant complaints.  The Court addresses each type of evidence in 

turn.                                                                     
        1.   Music Credits                                              
   Plaintiffs argue that the application of music credits and tags to the Videos-in-Suit is an 
indicator of red flag knowledge.  The Court agrees that such identification of the underlying 
music by a Vimeo employee permits the inference that that employee knew that the video 
contained copyrighted material.  In the case of the 300 Videos-in-Suit in which the names of 
artists and/or song titles are referenced in the title, description, tags or comments on the videos, 
see SSUF ¶ 61, the Court could reasonably infer that a Vimeo employee “recogni[zed] . . . 
infringing music in the soundtrack.”  Vimeo III, 826 F.3d at 96.  But even assuming that Court 
would infer recognition in this context, such a showing would not meet the standard articulated 

in Vimeo III because “[a]wareness that a user posting contains copyrighted music” is insufficient 
proof of red flag knowledge.  Id. at 97.  Vimeo employees cannot be “automatically expected to 
know how likely or unlikely it may be that the user who posted the material had authorization to 
use the copyrighted music.”  Id.  Accordingly, this evidence, which Plaintiffs regard as “perhaps 
the most probative” in the record, Pls. Memo. at 6 n.4, does not suffice to create a triable issue of 
fact  on  red  flag  knowledge  without  an  additional  showing  that  Vimeo  employees  could 
distinguish authorized from unauthorized uses of copyrighted music.       
        2.   Likes, Duration, and Start Time                            
   For similar reasons, evidence that employees “liked” videos or added them to Vimeo’s 
promotional channels does not raise a triable issue of fact on red flag knowledge in this instance.  
Nor does evidence that a copyrighted song played at the beginning of a Video-in-Suit and/or 

through the entirety of the video.  As explained above, proof that the screening employee 
possessed facts that would make it objectively obvious that a video  contained copyrighted 
material does not, on its own, suffice to meet Plaintiff’s burden of proof on summary judgment.  
   The evidence of employee interaction with Video 29 exemplifies this principle.  Even if 
there was proof that a Vimeo employee watched the entirety of that video—which depicts 
Christina Aguilera performing “Genie in a Bottle” live at a concert in Kiev and was tagged as 
such—that showing does not on its own demonstrate knowledge of facts making infringement 
objectively obvious under Vimeo III’s strict standard.  See Berkley Decl., Ex. C at 9, Video 29.  
This is so because knowledge of the likelihood that Christina Aguilera would authorize, for 
distribution on the internet, footage of a live performance from Ukraine cannot automatically be 

imputed to Vimeo employees.  See Vimeo III, 826 F.3d at 97.  Absent some evidence of Vimeo-
employee knowledge on this subject—for example, that Christina Aguilera has not issued any 
licenses  of  her  concert  footage,  or  even  that  performing  artists  generally  do  not  authorize 
distribution of their concerts—the Court cannot presume that this particular case of infringement 
would be objectively obvious to the Vimeo employee that watched this video.  Cf. MP3tunes, 
LLC, 844 F.3d at 93 (citing evidence that employees knew that no Beatles songs had been 
licensed  for  distribution  on  the  internet).    As  nothing  in  the  record  indicates  that  Vimeo 
employees possessed such knowledge about videos that they did not themselves create or upload, 
no  amount  of  employee  interaction  with  this  video  can  create  a  triable  issue  on  red  flag 
knowledge.                                                                
        3.   Comments                                                   
   Plaintiffs next set forth evidence of dozens of comments that were placed by Vimeo 

employees below videos with infringing content.  But again, none of these comments indicate 
employee  awareness  that  a  video  contained  unlicensed  or  otherwise  infringing  music.  The 
majority  of  Vimeo-employee  comments  are  basic  compliments,  for  example,  “great  job!!,” 
Berkley Decl., Ex. B, Video Ex. 3; “So much fun and very cool song selection . . . . ,” id. Video 
Ex. 6-A; “Nice stuff, Ben!” id., Video Ex. 48; “I’m REALLY impressed with this, it covers a 
whole new territory for lip dubbing; closer to an actual music video,” id. Video Ex. 51; “mad 
skillz, yo!” id., Video Ex. 236; and many others.                         
   Other comments merely reflect the employee-viewer’s identification of the song and 
artist.    For  example,  under  a  user’s  video  which  incorporates  “Like  Spinning  Plates”  by 
Radiohead  as  background  music  for  a  photo  compilation,  Vimeo  employee  Daniel  Hayek 

commented, “That track works so well with this.” Berkley Decl., Ex. C at 66, Video 189.  To 
reiterate, such a remark says nothing about Hayek’s awareness whether the use of the song was 
authorized in this particular case, or how likely it was that a Radiohead song would be licensed 
for such use.                                                             
   Nor do employee comments regarding users’ desires to purchase the songs featured in 
videos.  For example, in response to a user’s comment suggesting that, for lip dub videos,3 
Vimeo should post links for users “to buy the songs at itunes or the cd at amazon,” Vimeo 
employee Jonathan Marcus wrote, “Good idea. I agree. Something were [sic] definitely thinking 

3 As this Court explained in Vimeo I, lip dub videos or “lip dubbing” were described on Vimeo’s website as follows: 
“Lip Dubbing . . . Like a music video. Shoot yourself mouthing along to a song. Then sync it with a high quality 
copy of the song in an editing program.” Dkt. 88-3, Frackman Decl., Ex. 2 (Klein Dep.) at 167:20–168:2; id., Ex. 17. 
about.”  Frackman  Decl.,  Ex.  C,  Video  249A  at  2.  Yet  no  further  evidence  is  adduced  to 
demonstrate that Marcus knew that the use of “Overnight Celebrity” by Twista for a lip dub—the 
video  below  which  he  made  this  comment—was  not  authorized,  or  even  unlikely  to  be 
authorized.  Berkley Decl., Ex. C at 85, Video 249.  In sum, the record is devoid of a single 

comment  in  which  a  Vimeo  employee  demonstrated  awareness  of  facts  that  the  music 
incorporated in the video was obviously infringing, as that standard was articulated in Vimeo III. 
        4.   Whitelisting                                               
   Whitelisting—an action preventing users from flagging a video for review—indicates 
that a Vimeo employee screened a video for the specific purpose of determining whether it 
complied with Vimeo’s Terms of Service.  SSUF ¶¶ 89, 90; Def. SSUF ¶ 57; Def. Memo. at 18 
n.13  (not  disputing  the  purpose  of  whitelisting).    Unlike  the  other  video-viewing  purposes 
mentioned by the Court of Appeals in Vimeo III—such as “classification by subject matter” or 
“sampling to detect inappropriate obscenity or bigotry”—whitelisting could, in theory, relate to 
“recognition of infringing music in the soundtrack.”  Vimeo III, 826 F.3d at 96.  Vimeo’s Terms 

of Service forbid users from uploading videos that infringe another’s rights.  See Dkt. 85, 
Supplemental Declaration of Michael A. Cheah, Nov. 16, 2012 (“Supp. Cheah Decl.”) ¶ 11 & 
Exs. 6–10.  Accordingly, a Vimeo employee tasked with assessing the compliance of a Video-in-
Suit  with  those  terms  of  service  may  well  have  considered  the  possibility  of  copyright 
infringement.                                                             
   The  parties  dispute  whether  Vimeo  staff  made  “determinations  about  potential 
infringement with respect to the music in any of the whitelisted Videos-in-suit.”  Dkt. 192, Pls. 
Counter. 56.1 ¶ 65.  Yet even if whitelisting did involve such determinations, there is no 
evidence in the record that for any particular whitelisted video, a Vimeo employee “kn[ew] that 
the work was infringing, or kn[ew] facts that made this obvious.”  Vimeo III, 826 F.3d at 97.  
There is no evidence that the whitelisting-review process involved any analysis of licensing or 
fair use.  Nor have Plaintiffs adduced any evidence that a Vimeo employee whitelisted any 
specific Video-in-Suit with knowledge that the use of the incorporated music was unauthorized. 

   The only example Plaintiffs cite of a Vimeo employee whitelisting a video while aware 
that the uploader did not have rights to the underlying copyrighted music relates to a video not 
involved in this lawsuit.  See Dkt. 203-2, Pls. Reply to Def. Counter. 56.1 ¶ 93 (not disputing that 
the referenced video is not a Video-in-Suit); Frackman Supp. Decl., Ex. R.  For all other 
evidence of whitelisting, Plaintiffs do not indicate which employees whitelisted which videos, 
nor  why  a  video  was  whitelisted  or  whether  the  employee  knew  facts  that  would  make 
infringement objectively obvious.  As an example, Plaintiffs have adduced evidence that the 
aforementioned Christina Aguilera concert video was whitelisted.  See Dkt. 219-1, Post-Remand 
Third Supplemental Declaration of James D. Berkley, Ex. B at 15, Video 29.  Although a finder 
of fact may infer that a Vimeo moderator watched the video for the purposes of determining 

compliance with Vimeo’s Terms of Service, there is no evidence in the record that the review 
process revealed any facts to the moderator that would suggest that this specific video was 
unlicensed, or otherwise made it “objectively obvious” that it infringed a copyright.  Absent such 
evidence, whitelisting does not suffice to create an issue of fact as to red flag knowledge.   
        5.   Burying                                                    
   “Burying”  is  broadly  defined  as  de-emphasizing  a  video  that  is  “not  exemplary  of 
‘Vimeoesque’ content.” Dkt. 88-4, Frackman Decl., Ex. 3 (Allen Dep.) at 183:16–184:6.  The 
Court finds this practice less probative of red flag knowledge than whitelisting, as it does not 
even theoretically involve a review of whether the video complies with the Terms of Service.  
And even if it did—as Plaintiffs note, one Vimeo employee acknowledged that burying occurs 
“when a video is okay by the guidelines” but should be de-publicized for other reasons, Pls. 
SSUF ¶ 101—there is no evidence in the record that this form of interaction with an infringing 
video led any employee to possess facts making infringement objectively obvious, in the manner 

required by Vimeo III.                                                    
        6.   Channels & Employee Inducement                             
   Similarly,  none  of  the  evidence  that  Vimeo  promoted  certain  user-generated  videos 
through the use of channels is relevant to red flag knowledge.  Plaintiffs’ allegations demonstrate 
only that Vimeo employees were more familiar with the subject matter of certain videos, without 
indicating that they were able to identify that these videos were unlicensed or did not constitute 
fair use.  That a Vimeo employee selected the user-generated video “Artspin” for placement on 
Vimeo’s “We Found These!” channel, for instance, does not signify that a Vimeo employee 
knew the video’s audio track (“Plastic Beach” by Gorillaz) was not licensed to the user or that 
the video’s incorporation of that track was not fair use.  See Berkley Decl., Ex. C at 69–70, 

Video 122.                                                                
   Nor did Vimeo employees’ exhortations of users to create lip dub videos—music videos 
in which users lip synch to well-known songs, SSUF ¶ 111—show that they knew that such 
videos were inherently infringing.  Videos on the “Lip Dub Stars” channel are videos generated 
by users that incorporate a variety of background audio tracks.  Unlike a rip of a music video or 
television show, it is not objectively obvious to an individual with no specialized knowledge of 
copyright that a lip dub video constitutes a “clear violation[]” of copyright, SSUF ¶ 168.  With 
this type of video, fair use is an open relevant question.  See Downs, 385 F. Supp. 3d at 306 
(acknowledging “the fair use and licensing issues raised by the inclusion of a sound recording in 
a video”).  Even assuming Vimeo employees knew that some copyright infringement occurred 
on this channel, there is no evidence that the types of videos on these channels were by their very 
nature unauthorized or ineligible for fair use, let alone that Vimeo employees were aware of such 
facts.                                                                    

        7.   Timing of Interaction Vis-à-Vis the Lawsuit.               
   Next, Plaintiffs appear to argue that their cease-and-desist letters and complaints imparted 
red flag knowledge to Vimeo employees with respect to a subset of the Videos-in-Suit.  See Pls. 
SSUF ¶ 130 (identifying Vimeo employee’s February 2010 “like” of a video that had been listed 
on the schedules of Plaintiff Capitol Records’ complaint).  Plaintiffs have alleged only that these 
Videos-in-Suit, uploaded after Plaintiffs sent cease-and-desist letters and filed the complaint, 
“contained music by artists identified in the schedules.”  Pls. SSUF ¶¶ 36, 38.  Under this view 
of DMCA liability, once Plaintiffs had identified Coldplay in their complaint as an artist whose 
music appeared unlawfully on Vimeo’s website, red flag knowledge would be imputed to Vimeo 
with respect to all subsequently uploaded, user-generated videos containing music by Coldplay.  

That contention misconstrues the concept of red flag knowledge.  As one court in this district has 
put it, “past notices do not identify and locate other, and future, infringing activity.”  Wolk v. 
Kodak Imaging Network, Inc., No. 10 Civ. 4135 (RWS), 2011 WL 940056, at *5 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 
17, 2011); see also Ventura Content, Ltd. v. Motherless, Inc., 885 F.3d 597, 611 (9th Cir.) 
(“[E]ven if it were obvious to a reasonable person that some of the material on the site must be 
infringing, that is not enough to lose the safe harbor.  It must be obvious that the particular 
material that is the subject of the claim is infringing.”), cert. denied, 139 S. Ct. 419 (2018).    
   The Court finds the reasoning in those cases to be persuasive and applicable to the instant 
situation.  The fact that an artist’s copyright was previously infringed on Vimeo does not suffice 
to indicate to an employee whether use of that artist’s work in a subsequent video is authorized.   
The situation might differ if Plaintiffs had adduced evidence that Vimeo employees possessed 
so-called categorical knowledge about the licensing practices of particular artists.  Had Plaintiffs’ 
initial complaints indicated that Coldplay had not authorized any of its music for use on Vimeo 

or similar platforms, for example, then proof that a Vimeo employee recognized a Coldplay song 
on its platform may suffice to establish red flag knowledge.  See MP3tunes, LLC, 844 F.3d at 93.  
Absent proof that Vimeo employees had such categorical knowledge, however, the timing of 
employee interactions with the Videos-in-Suit does not create a triable issue of fact on red flag 
knowledge.                                                                
        8.   Employee Involvement in the Creation of Videos (Short of Uploading) 
   Finally, Plaintiffs set forth evidence of three instances where Vimeo employees were 
involved in contributing to videos.  The Court views employee involvement in the creation of the 
video  as  suggestive  of  knowledge  that  the  users  lacked  authorization  to  incorporate  the 
copyrighted music.  This form of interaction with Videos-in-Suit is nevertheless distinct from an 

employee upload or employee maintenance of videos on Vimeo.com.  Employee uploading of a 
video may disqualify Vimeo from the § 512(c)(1) safe harbor with respect to that video, which 
protects only against infringement of copyright by reason of the storage at the direction of a user.  
See infra Part III.C.                                                     
   First, Plaintiffs note that Andrea Allen “contributed” to a Beatles “group project.” Pls. 
SSUF ¶ 59.  This allegation refers to Video-in-Suit No. 214, a lip dub video that incorporates, or 
parodies, the audio track “All Together Now” by the Beatles, uploaded by user PEIKA.  Berkley 
Decl., Ex. C at 101–02.  Allen commented numerous times under the video, including the 
following comment: “Great work! Thanks for letting me be a part of it. Group hug.”  Frackman 
Supp. Decl., Ex. C, Video 214 at 6.  Unlike other comments by Vimeo employees that identified 
artists or complimented video quality, see supra Part III.B.3, this comment may be probative of 
red flag knowledge.  That Allen was “part of” the video’s creation suggests that she was aware 
that neither the video creators nor the user-uploader were authorized by the Beatles to use their 

song.   Nonetheless, it is not clear from the nature of the video—a lip dub that seems to parody a 
Beatles music video—whether it would qualify as fair use.  See supra Part III.B.6.  As explained 
above, because Plaintiffs have adduced no evidence that Allen—or any other Vimeo employee, 
for that matter—could distinguish fair use from infringement in such a case, they have failed to 
raise a triable issue of fact as to Video 214.  See supra Part III.A.     
   Second, Plaintiffs allege that Vimeo employee Dalas Verdugo “signed up” to participate 
in a project where Vimeo users would create a series of videos containing the entirety of the 
Beatles’ “Sgt. Pepper” album, and that he “commented” on at least one of the resulting videos.  
Pls. SSUF ¶ 58.  This allegation does not raise a triable issue of fact as to red flag knowledge.  
Verdugo merely commented on the “group project” page that he planned to contribute a lip dub 

video of “With A Little Help From My Friends,” but later wrote, “I’ve been really busy/lazy and 
haven’t gotten around to this yet, but I’m still planning on doing it.”  Frackman Decl., Ex. 15 at 
11, 31.  None of the Videos-in-Suit were created or uploaded by Verdugo as part of this project, 
and Verdugo’s comments do not demonstrate that he knew other videos in this “group project” 
were unlicensed, or the likelihood that they were.                        
   Third, Plaintiffs allege that Vimeo employee Blake Whitman, via his online alias “Bad 
Malone,” was listed as one of the “referrers” for the infringing video “The Dark Side of Oz.” Pls. 
SSUF ¶ 132; Berkley Decl., Ex. C at 85.  Not only do Plaintiffs fail to explain what “referring” 
means in this context, they also do not indicate how “referring” led this Vimeo employee to 
know facts making infringement obvious.  Absent such information, the Court cannot infer that 
“referring” the video gave Whitman any additional insight into whether the video’s creators or 
users were authorized to use the copyrighted music.  Plaintiffs list non-employee user Bryan 
Pugh as the video’s sole uploader. See Berkley Decl., Ex. C at 85 (video uploaded by Bryan 

Pugh not marked as “employee upload”).  This evidence does not therefore disqualify Vimeo 
from the DMCA safe harbor with respect to Video 176.                      
                             ***                                        
   In sum, none of the evidence adduced by Plaintiffs on remand carries the high burden of 
raising a triable issue of fact as to whether Vimeo employees “either knew the video was 
infringing or knew facts making that conclusion obvious to an ordinary person who had no 
specialized knowledge of music or the laws of copyright.”  Vimeo III, 826 F.3d at 98.  Plaintiffs 
take issue with the steep threshold they must cross to demonstrate red flag knowledge, by 
arguing inter alia:  “Why . . . would [Vimeo] think that random users, who never claimed to have 
a license, would have one, let alone a license that would permit a user to sublicense music for 

dissemination on the internet?”  Pls. Memo. at 18.  With respect to fair use, Plaintiffs point out 
that “[n]o Vimeo Staff came forward to claim that he or she considered fair use . . . when 
viewing a video at issue, let alone that any facts led to the belief that a particular video was 
licensed or the use of music was fair use.”  Pls. Reply at 9.             
   Although this Court found these arguments persuasive in the first instance, they are 
precluded by Vimeo III and by the Second Circuit’s interpretation of the compromise embodied 
in the DMCA.  As explained above, Plaintiffs bear the burden of demonstrating that Vimeo 
employees were aware of the licensing practices that affect the music uploaded onto their site, 
and, where relevant, were able to distinguish between fair and infringing use.  The fact that the 
record contains no evidence that Vimeo employees considered these issues when screening the 
Videos-in-Suit does not absolve Plaintiffs of this burden.  The Court of Appeals expressly stated 
that  service-provider  employees  cannot  “be  automatically  expected  to  know  how  likely  or 
unlikely it may be that the user who posted the material had authorization to use the copyrighted 

music.”  Vimeo III, 826 F.3d at 97.  Plaintiffs have adduced no evidence, either in general or 
specific to the Videos-in-Suit, to suggest that Vimeo employees had such knowledge in this case.  
The same is true of fair use, a doctrine that is implicated by the nature of the infringing material 
here, i.e., music incorporated into videos generated by the users themselves.  
   Because, pursuant to Vimeo III, a service provider cannot be presumed to know that 
content on its site is licensed or does not qualify as fair use, Plaintiff’s lack of evidence in that 
respect is dispositive.  Vimeo is therefore entitled to summary judgment under the DMCA safe 
harbor as to all user-uploaded videos.                                    
   C.   Employee-Uploaded Videos                                        
   The Court separately considers whether Vimeo is entitled to summary judgment on the 

set of videos Plaintiffs have identified as uploaded by Vimeo or Connected Ventures employees. 
In Vimeo I, this Court found that a triable issue of fact had been raised with respect to whether 
Vimeo  employees  who  uploaded  allegedly  infringing  videos  were  “storing  their  content  as 
‘users’  within  the  meaning  of  §  512(c)  or  as  employees  acting  within  the  scope  of  their 
employment.”  972 F. Supp. 2d at 519.  If the employees stored their videos as independent 
users, not on behalf of the company, then Vimeo would remain entitled to safe-harbor protection 
as the videos would have been stored “at the direction of a user” rather than the service provider. 
17 U.S.C. § 512(c)(1); see Gershwin Publ’g Corp. v. Columbia Artists Mgmt., Inc., 443 F.2d 
1159, 1161–62 (2d Cir. 1971) (affirming that one who promotes or induces “infringing acts” 
infringement  may  be  liable  under  the  Copyright  Act  even  without  actual  knowledge  of 
infringement).  The Second Circuit did not address this issue on appeal.  Vimeo III, 826 F.3d at 
86 n.6.                                                                   
   After  this  Court  allowed  Plaintiffs  to  amend  their  complaint  to  include  additional 

instances of infringement, Vimeo II, 972 F. Supp. 2d at 549–50, Plaintiffs identified 26 videos 
that were uploaded to the Vimeo website by its employees.  See Pls. SSUF ¶ 29(a)–(z). The 
Court has already denied summary judgment to both parties on ten of these videos, Vimeo I, 972 
F. Supp. 2d at 519, which correspond to the original set that Plaintiffs identified as uploaded by 
Vimeo employees.  Compare Plaintiffs’ Original Statement of Undisputed Facts ¶ 63(a)–(j), with 
Pls. SSUF ¶ 29(a)–(z).  There are thus 16 additional allegations of employee-uploaded videos for 
the Court to consider.                                                    
   As this Court held with respect to the first ten employee-uploaded videos, “[r]easonable 
minds could differ . . . as to the extent to which the videos at issue here were uploaded by Vimeo 
employees in their personal capacities as opposed to as agents of Vimeo.” Vimeo I, 972 F. Supp. 

2d at 519.  Each of these additional 16 videos were uploaded by individuals identified in the 
declaration of Katie McGregor—the head of Human Resources for Connected Ventures and  
prior  head  of  Human  Resources  for  Vimeo—as  employees  of  either  Vimeo  or  Connected 
Ventures.  Dkt. 84, McGregor Decl. ¶ 2(a)–(m).  The fact that in some cases the uploader may 
have only uploaded but not “maintained” the video does not resolve the dispute over whether the 
individual “stored” the video at the direction of Vimeo.  Nor does the fact that certain uploaders 
were Connected Venture employees, rather than Vimeo employees, resolve the issue of whether 
they had the authority to bind Vimeo, even after Vimeo’s assets separated from Connected 
Ventures in July 2008.  See Dkt. 189, Def. Counter. 56.1 ¶ 29.  Neither party has sufficiently 
briefed  the  question  of whether  this  separation  of  assets  in  July  2008  affects  whether  a 
Connected Ventures employee could still have uploaded an infringing video to Vimeo’s website 
“at the direction” of Vimeo, rather than as an independent user.  As there is a genuine dispute of 
material fact over whether they were uploaded by employees acting as Vimeo’s agents, the Court 
denies Vimeo’s summary judgment motion as to these videos. 
                              CONCLUSION 
    Applying the standard set forth in Vimeo IT, and for the reasons stated above, Plaintiffs’ 
motion must be denied in its entirety.  Vimeo’s motion is denied as to the 26 videos which were 
uploaded  or maintained by Vimeo  or Connected Ventures  employees,  and granted  as  to  the 
remaining 281 videos.  See generally Berkley Decl., Ex. C. 
    The parties shall submit a letter providing the Court with an update as to the status of this 
case and proposed next steps no later than June 18, 2021. 
SO ORDERED. 
Dated:       May 28, 2021                            
          New York, New York              KA 
                                                   ES     agg 
                                       Ronnie Abrams     
                                        United States District Judge 

                                    28