UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                              
                      DISTRICT OF MAINE                                  


CENTRAL MAINE POWER            )                                         
COMPANY, et al.,               )                                         
                               )                                         
                Plaintiffs,    )                                         
                               )                                         
v.                             )  Docket No. 1:23-cv-00450-NT            
                               )                                         
MAINE COMMISSION ON            )                                         
GOVERNMENTAL ETHICS AND        )                                         
ELECTION PRACTICES, et al.,    )                                         
                               )                                         
                Defendants.    )                                         

ORDER ON PLAINTIFFS’ MOTIONS FOR PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION                  
    Before me are preliminary injunction motions by Plaintiffs Central Maine 
Power Company (ECF No. 4), Versant Power and ENMAX Corporation (ECF No. 22), 
the Maine Press Association and the Maine Association of Broadcasters (ECF No. 25), 
and  a  group  of  Maine  voters  and  electors  (ECF  No.  27),  seeking  to  enjoin  the 
Defendants  from  implementing  and  enforcing  “An  Act  to  Prohibit  Campaign 
Spending by Foreign Governments” (the “Act”) until a final judgment is entered in 
this matter. For the reasons stated below, the motions are GRANTED. Because I am 
granting  the  preliminary  injunction  on  the  issues  that  Central  Maine  Power 
Company’s motion and Versant Power and ENMAX Corporation’s motion raise, and 
because time is limited given that the Act is slated to go into effect on March 1, 2024, 
I do not address the arguments put forth by the remaining Plaintiffs.     
                    FACTUAL BACKGROUND                                   
    A.   Central Maine Power Company and Versant Power                   
    There are two large electric transmission and distribution utility companies  
operating in the State of Maine. Verified Compl. (“CMP Compl.”) ¶ 26 (ECF No. 1).1 

The largest, Central Maine Power Company (“CMP”), was incorporated in Maine in 
1905 and has remained a Maine company, operating and deriving its revenue from 
Maine customers. CMP Compl. ¶¶ 16–17, 26. It is run by a board of directors and its 
executive  officers,  all  of  whom  are  United  States  citizens.  CMP  Compl.  ¶ 18. 
Currently, CMP’s shares are 100% owned by another Maine corporation, CMP Group, 
Inc., which in turn is wholly owned by Avangrid Networks, Inc., another Maine 
corporation. CMP Compl. ¶¶ 20–21. Avangrid Networks, Inc. is 100% owned by 

Avangrid, Inc., a New York corporation whose shares of common stock are listed on 
the New York Stock Exchange and are publicly traded so anyone can buy them. CMP 
Compl. ¶¶ 22–23. Iberdrola, S.A., a publicly traded corporation headquartered in 
Spain, currently owns over 80% of Avangrid, Inc.’s shares. CMP Compl. ¶ 23. Other 
owners of Avangrid, Inc. stock are:                                       
    •  The Qatar Investment Authority (the State of Qatar’s sovereign wealth 
      fund) – owning approximately 3.7% of outstanding Avangrid, Inc. shares; 
      and                                                                
    •  Norges  Bank  (the  central  bank  of  the  Kingdom  of  Norway)  –  owning 
      approximately 0.4% of outstanding Avangrid, Inc. shares.           
CMP Compl. ¶ 24. In addition, the Qatar Investment Authority holds approximately 
8.7% and Norges Bank holds approximately 3.6% of outstanding Iberdrola, S.A. 

1    Unless otherwise indicated, cites to ECF entries refer to Docket No. 1:23-cv-00450-NT. 
shares. CMP Compl. ¶ 24. No one from the Qatar Investment Authority or Norges 
Bank serves as an officer or director of CMP (or CMP Group, Avangrid Networks, 
Inc., or Avangrid, Inc.). CMP Compl. ¶ 25. Nor is any officer or director of CMP, CMP 

Group, Avangrid Networks, Inc., or Avangrid, Inc. a Qatari or Norwegian national. 
CMP Compl. ¶ 25.                                                          
    The other significant electric transmission and distribution utility company in 
Maine is Versant Power (“Versant”). Verified Compl. for Declaratory and Injunctive 
Relief (“Versant Compl.”) ¶ 62 (ECF No. 1), Docket No. 1:23-cv-00451-NT. Versant 
is incorporated in Maine and (with its predecessors) has operated exclusively in 

Maine for more than ninety-nine years. Versant Compl. ¶¶ 15, 62. Versant’s common 
stock is 100% owned by ENMAX US Holdco, Inc., which in turn is wholly owned by 
ENMAX Corporation. Versant Compl. ¶¶ 63–65. The City of Calgary in Alberta, 
Canada  is  the  sole  shareholder  of  ENMAX  Corporation.  Versant  Compl.  ¶ 58. 
Notwithstanding its ownership of the stock of ENMAX Corporation, the City of 
Calgary  does  not  have  any  decision-making  authority  over,  or  the  ability  to 
participate  in,  the  operations  or  management  of  ENMAX  Corporation  or  the 

operations,  management,  or  governance  of  Versant.  Versant  Compl.  ¶ 66.  It  is 
expressly prohibited from such participation by orders of the Maine Public Utilities 
Commission (“PUC”) and a stipulation that Versant entered with the PUC. Versant 
Compl. ¶¶ 66–87. No representative of the City of Calgary has ever served as an 
officer or director of Versant and no representative of ENMAX Corporation has ever 
served as an officer of Versant. Versant Compl. ¶ 88.                     
    B.   The Corridor Referendum                                         
    In 2021, Maine voters faced a ballot initiative question seeking to prohibit the 
construction of an electric transmission line that was proposed to run through Maine 

from Canada and was frequently referred to as the “CMP Corridor.” CMP Compl. 
¶ 28. CMP engaged in political advocacy to oppose the CMP Corridor initiative. CMP 
Compl. ¶ 28. In addition, a corporate entity named H.Q. Energy Services (U.S.) Inc. 
(“HQUS”),  a  subsidiary  of  Hydro-Québec,  made  contributions,  totaling  over  $22 
million,  to  encourage  Maine  voters  to  reject  the  corridor  referendum.  Decl.  of 
Jonathan  Wayne  (“Wayne  Decl.”)  ¶¶ 13–14  (ECF  No.  47-1).  HQUS’s  massive 
election spending on the corridor referendum caused concern. For example, during 

the corridor referendum campaign, a bipartisan group of current and former Maine 
legislators sent a letter to the Premier of Québec and the CEO of Hydro-Québec 
demanding that Hydro-Québec “cease all further campaign activities in Maine and 
let the people of Maine vote without further meddling in our elections.” Decl. of 
Jonathan Bolton (“Bolton Decl.”), Ex. B (ECF No. 47-6). And following the corridor 
referendum campaign, elected leaders from both major parties publicly criticized 

HQUS’s election spending. See State Defs.’ Combined Opp’n to the Mots. for Prelim. 
Relief (“State Opp’n”) 6 (ECF No. 47) (collecting articles). This concern provoked a 
legislative response. In January 2021, a group of legislators introduced L.D. 194, “An 
Act  to  Prohibit  Contributions,  Expenditures,  and  Participation  by  Foreign 
Government-owned Entities to Influence Referenda.” CMP Compl. ¶ 38. L.D. 194 
passed by a significant margin, but the Governor vetoed it, citing concerns about L.D. 
194’s constitutionality. CMP Compl. ¶ 39; see also Bolton Decl., Ex. E (ECF No. 47-
9).                                                                       
    C.   The Act                                                         

    Undaunted, supporters of L.D. 194 then gathered enough signatures to seek 
enactment of a similar law—the Act—under the direct democracy provision of the 
Maine  Constitution.  Versant  Compl.  ¶¶ 29–30.  As  required  by  the  Maine 
Constitution, the Act was presented to the Legislature as L.D. 1610 for additional 
proceedings, and it passed, but it was again vetoed by the Governor who reiterated 
her constitutional concerns. Versant Compl. ¶¶ 26, 31–33. As a result, the Act was 
placed on the November 2023 ballot as Question 2. Versant Compl. ¶ 35.    

    Maine voters enacted the Act by a vote of 348,781 to 55,226—the biggest win 
for a citizens’ initiative in either percentage or absolute terms in Maine’s history. 
Bolton  Decl.,  Ex.  F  (ECF  No.  10);  Maine  State  Legislature,  Legislative  History 
Collection,  Citizen  Initiated  Legislation,  1911–Present,  https://www.maine.gov/ 
legis/lawlib/lldl/citizeninitiated/. The Governor proclaimed the results of the election 
on December 6, 2023. Bolton Decl., Ex. F. As explained in greater detail below, the 

Act bars foreign governments and “foreign government-influenced” entities from 
spending on Maine’s elections. 21-A M.R.S. § 1064(1)(E), (2).2 It bolsters that ban with 
additional provisions, including prohibitions on solicitation or assistance activities, 
disclosure requirements, and affirmative duties on the media to ensure they do not 


2    For ease of reference, I use the proposed statutory citation. The Act was attached to CMP’s 
complaint as Exhibit A (ECF No. 1-1).                                     
publish otherwise-barred communications. Id. § 1064(3), (4), (6), (7). Violations of the 
Act are punishable by monetary penalty or imprisonment. Id. § 1064(8), (9). 
    The Act was scheduled to take effect in early January of this year and is 

intended to be codified at Title 21-A, Section 1064 of the Maine Revised Statutes. 
CMP Compl. ¶¶ 46, 48. The central provision of the Act, subsection 2, provides: 
    Campaign  spending  by  foreign  governments  prohibited.  A         
    foreign  government-influenced  entity  may  not  make,  directly  or 
    indirectly,  a  contribution,  expenditure,  independent  expenditure, 
    electioneering communication or any other donation or disbursement of 
    funds to influence the nomination or election of a candidate or the  
    initiation or approval of a referendum.                              
21-A M.R.S. § 1064(2). Under the Act, a “foreign government-influenced entity” is: 
    (1) A foreign government; or                                         
    (2) A firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization or other 
    entity  with  respect  to  which  a  foreign  government  or  foreign 
    government-owned entity:                                             
         (a)  Holds,  owns,  controls  or  otherwise  has  direct  or  indirect 
         beneficial  ownership  of  5%  or  more  of  the  total  equity, 
         outstanding voting shares, membership units or other applicable 
         ownership interests; or                                         
         (b) Directs, dictates, controls or directly or indirectly participates 
         in the decision-making process with regard to the activities of the 
         firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization or other 
         entity to influence the nomination or election of a candidate or the 
         initiation  or  approval  of  a  referendum,  such  as  decisions 
         concerning  the  making  of  contributions,  expenditures,      
         independent  expenditures,  electioneering  communications  or  
         disbursements.                                                  
Id. § 1064(1)(E). A “foreign government-owned entity” means “any entity in which a 
foreign government owns or controls more than 50% of its equity or voting shares.” 
Id. § 1064(1)(F). The Act also includes a disclosure provision that would require any 
public communication made by a foreign government-influenced entity—that is not 
otherwise prohibited—to “clearly and conspicuously contain the words ‘Sponsored 
by’ ” immediately followed by the name of the foreign government-influenced entity 
and a statement identifying it as a “foreign government” or a “foreign government-
influenced entity.” Id. § 1064(6).                                        

    In addition to the subsections aimed at foreign government-influenced entities, 
the Act contains a provision directed to “television [and] radio broadcasting station[s], 
provider[s]  of  cable  or  satellite  television,  print  news  outlet[s]  and  Internet 
platform[s].”  Id.  § 1064(7).  Each  such  media-related  entity  must  “establish  due 
diligence policies, procedures and controls that are reasonably designed to ensure 
that it does not broadcast, distribute or otherwise make available to the public” any 

public communication that violates the Act. Id. § 1064(7). And, “[i]f an Internet 
platform discovers that it has distributed a public communication” that does violate 
the Act, it must “immediately remove the communication and notify the commission.” 
Id. § 1064(7).                                                            
    The Act imposes monetary penalties of up to $5,000 or up to double the amount 
expended  in  the  prohibited  action,  whichever  is  greater,  for  each  violation.  Id. 
§ 1064(8). Anyone who knowingly violates subsection 2 commits a Class C crime, Id. 

§ 1064(8), which may subject the person to a term of incarceration of up to five years. 
17-A M.R.S. § 1604(1)(C).                                                 
    CMP and the  Versant Plaintiffs have stated that they plan to engage in 
political speech again, but that such spending and communications are now barred 
under the Act. CMP Compl. ¶¶ 32–35; Versant Compl. ¶ 6.                   
                  PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND                                  
    In mid-December 2023, four complaints were filed seeking declaratory and 
injunctive relief relating to the Act. CMP brought the first case against the Maine 

Commission on Governmental Ethics and Election Practices (the “Commission”), 
the Chairman and the four other members of the Commission, and the Attorney 
General of the State of Maine (collectively, the “State”). CMP Compl., Docket No. 
1:23-cv-00450-NT.  CMP  alleged  six  counts:  (1)  that  the  Act’s  ban  on  referenda 
spending  violates  the  First  Amendment;  (2)  that  the  Act’s  ban  on  candidate 
campaigns violates the First Amendment; (3) that the Act’s disclaimer requirement 
violates the First Amendment; (4) that the Act violates the Due Process Clause of the 

Fourteenth Amendment;  (5) that the Act violates the free speech rights guaranteed 
by the Maine Constitution; and (6) that the remaining provisions in subsection 1 of 
the Act cannot be severed from the offending provisions. CMP Compl. ¶¶ 66–95. 
Along with its complaint, CMP also filed a motion for a temporary restraining order 
and preliminary injunction seeking to enjoin enforcement of the Act. Pl.’s Mot. for 
TRO and Prelim. Inj. (“CMP PI Mot.”) (ECF No. 4).                         

    Versant  and  ENMAX  Corporation  (together  hereinafter,  the  “Versant 
Plaintiffs”  or  “Versant”)  also  filed  a  complaint  against  the  same  Defendants. 
Versant Compl., Docket No. 1:23-cv-00451-NT. The Versant Plaintiffs alleged four 
counts: (1) that the Act violates the Supremacy Clause because it is preempted by 
federal election law; (2) that the Act violates the First and Fourteenth Amendments; 
(3) that the Act violates Article I, Section 4 of the Maine Constitution; and (4) that 
the Act violates the Foreign Commerce Clause. Versant Compl. ¶¶ 104–141. Like 
CMP, Versant filed a motion for a temporary restraining order and preliminary 
injunction along with their complaint. Pls.’ Mot. for TRO and Prelim. Inj. (“Versant 
PI Mot.”) (ECF No. 22), see Docket No. 1:23-cv-00451-NT (ECF No. 4).      

    Plaintiffs Maine Press Association and Maine Association of Broadcasters 
(together, the “Media Plaintiffs”) filed the third Act-related complaint against the 
Defendants. Compl. for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief (“Media Compl.”) (ECF 
No. 1), Docket No. 1:23-cv-00452-NT. The Media Plaintiffs’ complaint focuses on 
subsection 7 of the Act and alleges four counts: (1) that the Act is void for vagueness 
under the First and Fourteenth Amendments; (2) that the Act violates the First 

Amendment because it places an unconstitutional burden on news outlets; (3) that 
the Act violates the First Amendment because it constitutes a prior restraint; and (4) 
that  the  Act  violates  the  First  Amendment  by  imposing  strict  liability  on  the 
publication of political speech. Media Compl. ¶¶ 46–66. The Media Plaintiffs assert 
that they rely on revenue from advertisements, including political advertisements, 
but may have to stop running political advertisements they would otherwise accept 
to  avoid  “legal  risk.”  Media  Compl. ¶¶ 40, 43.  With  their  complaint,  the  Media 

Plaintiffs filed a motion for preliminary injunction. Pls.’ Mot. for Prelim. Inj. (ECF 
No. 25), see Docket No. 1:23-cv-00452-NT (ECF No. 3).                     
    The last case was brought by Plaintiffs Jane Pringle, Kenneth Fletcher, Bonnie 
Gould, Brenda Garrand, and Lawrence Wold in their capacities as registered voters 
and electors (collectively, the “Electors”). Verified Compl. (“Electors Compl.”) (ECF 
No. 1), Docket No. 1:23-cv-00453-NT. The Electors’ complaint alleges eleven counts: 
(1) that the Act violates their constitutional right to petition the government; (2) that 
the Act violates their First Amendment right to free speech by limiting the sources of 
information  available  to  the  Electors;  (3)  that  the  Act  violates  the  Electors’ 

constitutional right to freedom of assembly; (4) that the Act violates the constitutional 
right to freedom of the press; (5) that the Act violates Due Process Clause notice 
standards; (6) that the Act violates the Maine Constitution’s right to petition the 
government; (7) that the Act violates the Maine Constitution’s protection of freedom 
of speech; (8) that the Act violates the Maine Constitution’s right of freedom of 
assembly; (9) that the Act violates the Maine Constitution’s protection of freedom of 

the press; (10) that the Act violates the separation of powers set forth in the Maine 
Constitution; and (11) that the Act violates the due process rights guaranteed by the 
Maine Constitution. Electors Compl. ¶¶ 79–167. The Electors intend to continue to 
seek, acquire, consider, and share information covered by the Act. Electors Compl. 
¶¶ 93–94. The Electors also filed a motion for a temporary restraining order and 
preliminary injunction. Pls.’ Mot. for TRO and Prelim. Inj. (ECF No. 27), see Docket 
No. 1:23-cv-00453-NT (ECF No. 8).                                         

    On December 13, 2023, I held a teleconference, in which counsel in all four 
cases  participated,  to  discuss  the  tight  timing  of  the  Plaintiffs’  motions  for  a 
temporary restraining order given that the Act was to go into effect on January 5, 
2024. Minute Entry (ECF No. 8). Following the conference, the State agreed to 
voluntarily refrain from enforcing the Act until February 29, 2024 to give the parties 
time to fully brief the issues. Following the conference, I entered an agreed-upon 
scheduling order for the briefing. Order Granting Mot. to Amend Scheduling Order 
to Set New Briefing Schedule for Mots. for Prelim. Relief (ECF No. 13). At the joint 
request of the parties, the four cases were consolidated on January 9, 2024. Order to 

Consolidate Cases (ECF No. 20). The State filed their omnibus opposition to the 
motions for preliminary injunctions on January 12, 2024. State Opp’n (ECF No. 47). 
On January 31, 2024, the Plaintiffs all filed their replies. See ECF Nos. 51–54.3 The 
matter came before me for oral argument on February 23, 2024.             

                       LEGAL STANDARD                                    
    In deciding whether to grant a preliminary injunction, district courts “must 
consider: (i) the movant’s likelihood of success on the merits of its claims; (ii) whether 
and to what extent the movant will suffer irreparable harm if the injunction is 
withheld; (iii) the balance of hardships as between the parties; and (iv) the effect, if 
any, that an injunction (or the withholding of one) may have on the public interest.” 

Corp. Techs., Inc. v. Harnett, 731 F.3d 6, 9 (1st Cir. 2013). “In the First Amendment 
context,  likelihood  of  success  on  the  merits  is  the  linchpin  of  the  preliminary 
injunction analysis.” Sindicato Puertorriqueño de Trabajadores v. Fortuño, 699 F.3d 
1, 10 (1st Cir. 2012) (per curiam).                                       


3    In January, I also granted permission for three groups to participate as amicus curiae. An 
organization called Free Speech for People filed an amicus brief in support of the State’s position. 
Amicus Curiae Br. of Free Speech for People in Supp. of Defs.’ Opp’n to Pls.’ Mots. for Prelim. Inj. and 
TROs (ECF No. 45). Another organization called Protect Maine Elections also filed an amicus brief in 
support of the State. Br. of Amicus Curiae Protect Maine Elections in Supp. of Defs. (ECF No. 46). And 
the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press filed an amicus brief supporting the Media 
Plaintiffs’ position. Amicus Curiae Br. of the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press (ECF No. 
50).                                                                      
                         DISCUSSION                                      
I.   Preemption                                                           
    In their motion for a preliminary injunction, the Versant Plaintiffs assert that 
the Act violates the Supremacy Clause of the United States Constitution. Versant PI 

Mot. 9. Versant argues that the Act is expressly preempted by the Federal Election 
Campaign Act (“FECA”), 52 U.S.C. § 30101 et seq., and is also impliedly preempted 
by FECA because the Act conflicts with Congress’s framework for regulating foreign 
influences in United States elections. Versant PI Mot. 9–13.              
    A.   General Preemption Principles                                   
    The Supremacy Clause of the United States Constitution provides, in relevant 
part, that: “[t]his Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be 

made in Pursuance thereof . . . shall be the supreme Law of the Land; and the Judges 
in every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing in the Constitution or Laws of any 
State  to  the  Contrary  notwithstanding.”  U.S.  Const.  art.  VI,  cl.  2.  Accordingly, 
because federal law is the supreme law of the land, Congress “has the power to pre-
empt state law.” Me. Forest Prods. Council v. Cormier, 51 F.4th 1, 6 (1st Cir. 2022) 
(quoting Arizona v. United States, 567 U.S. 387, 399 (2012)).             
    Preemption may be either express or implied depending on “whether Congress’ 

command is explicitly stated in the statute’s language or implicitly contained in its 
structure and purpose.” Gade v. Nat’l Solid Wastes Mgmt. Ass’n, 505 U.S. 88, 98 
(1992). Implied preemption then consists of two types, conflict and field. Capron v. 
Off. of Att’y Gen. of Mass., 944 F.3d 9, 21 (1st Cir. 2019); see Pub. Int. Legal Found., 
Inc. v. Bellows, 92 F.4th 36, 52 (1st Cir. 2024) (“There are three types of preemption: 
conflict, express, and field.”). The Versant Plaintiffs maintain that all three types of 
preemption—express, conflict, and field—apply here.                       
    The party asserting preemption bears the burden of proving it. Me. Forest 

Prods. Council, 51 F.4th at 6. The “ultimate task in any pre-emption case is to 
determine whether state regulation is consistent with the structure and purpose of 
the statute as a whole.” Gade, 505 U.S. at 98.                            
    B.   Express Preemption                                              
    “Where a federal statute contains a clause expressly purporting to preempt 
state law” courts must “focus on the plain wording of the clause, which necessarily 
contains the best evidence of Congress’ preemptive intent.” Medicaid and Medicare 

Advantage Prods. Ass’n of P.R., Inc. v. Hernández, 58 F.4th 5, 11 (1st Cir. 2023) 
(quoting Chamber of Com. of U.S. v. Whiting, 563 U.S. 582, 594 (2011)); CSX Transp., 
Inc. v. Easterwood, 507 U.S. 658, 664 (1993) (same).                      
    FECA’s express preemption provision states: “the provisions of this Act, and of 
rules prescribed under this Act, supersede and preempt any provision of State law 
with respect to election to Federal office.” 52 U.S.C. § 30143(a); see also 11 C.F.R. 

§ 108.7. FECA defines the term “Federal office” to mean “the office of President or 
Vice  President,  or  of  Senator  or  Representative  in,  or  Delegate  or  Resident 
Commissioner to, the Congress.” 52 U.S.C. § 30101(3). The Act’s funding prohibition 
applies to “the nomination or election of a candidate or the initiation or approval of a 
referendum,” 21-A M.R.S. § 1064(2) (emphasis added). It does not exclude federal 
elections, so on its face the Act would apply to the election of a candidate to federal 
office.                                                                   
    Despite the fact that the Act does not expressly carve out elections for federal 
office, the State contends that the Act falls outside FECA’s preemption provision. The 
State contends that the Act “cannot reasonably be read—and is not read by the 

enforcing  agencies—to  regulate  federal  elections  in  any  way.”  State’s  Opp’n  53 
(citation omitted). In support of its claim that the Act cannot reasonably be read to 
encompass federal elections, the State notes that, if allowed to go into effect, the Act 
will be housed in the Maine Revised Statutes in a chapter and subchapter that 
contain definitions that would limit the scope of the Act to just state and local 
elections. See State Opp’n 53 (quoting 21-A M.R.S. §§ 1011, 1051); see also 21-A 

M.R.S. § 1001(2) (defining “election” as “any primary, general or special election for 
state, county or municipal offices”). But at oral argument, the Versant Plaintiffs 
pointed to other Maine statutory provisions that could lead to the opposite conclusion. 
See, e.g., 21-A M.R.S. §§ 335, 354.                                       
    In support of the claim that the State’s enforcing agencies do not read the Act 
to regulate federal elections, the State offers a declaration from the current executive 
director of the Commission to that effect. See Wayne Decl. ¶¶ 5–10. But courts “may 

impose a limiting construction on a statute only if it is ‘readily susceptible’ to such a 
construction,” and courts will “not uphold an unconstitutional statute merely because 
the Government promised to use it responsibly.” United States v. Stevens, 559 U.S. 
460, 480–81 (2010) (citations omitted).                                   
    I conclude that FECA likely expressly preempts the Act insofar as the Act 
covers foreign spending in elections for federal office.                  
    C.   Implied Preemption                                              
    The next question is whether FECA impliedly preempts the Act. The Versant 
Plaintiffs contend that the Act is preempted by FECA under both conflict and field 

preemption. The State, arguing that the Act is not preempted, claims that two 
presumptions against preemption apply here. I consider the presumption arguments 
first and then go on to analyze the merits of Versant’s preemption argument.  
         1.   Presumptions                                               
    First, the State argues that a presumption against preemption applies because 
state elections are a traditional area of state regulation. “In all pre-emption cases, 
and particularly in those in which Congress has ‘legislated in a field which the States 
have traditionally occupied,’ [courts] ‘start with the assumption that the historic 

police powers of the States were not to be superseded by the Federal Act unless that 
was the clear and manifest purpose of Congress.’ ” Me. Forest Prods. Council, 51 F.4th 
at 6 (quoting Medtronic, Inc. v. Lohr, 518 U.S. 470, 485 (1996)). “The presumption 
does not apply, though, ‘when the State regulates in an area where there has been a 
history of significant federal presence.’ ” Id. (quoting United States v. Locke, 529 U.S. 
89, 108 (2000)). The Versant Plaintiffs maintain that the presumption does not apply 

because the Act addresses issues of foreign affairs, which is an area the federal 
government typically reserves for itself.                                 
    Although the Act does touch upon an aspect of foreign affairs—how foreign 
governments may spend money in Maine campaigns—the Act’s main focus is the 
regulation of Maine elections,4 and “the Framers of the Constitution intended the 
States to keep for themselves, as provided in the Tenth Amendment, the power to 
regulate elections.” Shelby Cnty., Ala. v. Holder, 570 U.S. 529, 543 (2013); see Minn. 

Chamber of Com. v. Choi, No. 23-CV-2015 (ECT/JFD), --- F. Supp. 3d ----, 2023 WL 
8803357, at *12 (D. Minn. Dec. 20, 2023) (“[S]tate elections are a traditional area of 
state regulation, and states’ historical authority to exclude aliens from participating 
in their democratic political institutions includes prohibiting foreign nationals from 
spending  money  in  their  elections.”).  Accordingly,  this  presumption  against 
preemption likely applies.                                                

    Second,  the  State  maintains  that,  because  FECA  contains  an  express 
preemption  clause,  that  provision  provides  a  “reliable  indicium  of  congressional 
intent” as to the scope of FECA’s preemption and therefore shows that Congress did 
not intend to preempt laws regulating state and local elections. State Opp’n 54 
(quoting Cipollone v. Liggett Grp., Inc., 505 U.S. 504, 517 (1992)). In Cipollone, the 
Supreme Court stated that “Congress’ enactment of a provision defining the pre-
emptive reach of a statute implies that matters beyond that reach are not pre-

empted.” Cipollone, 505 U.S. at 517. But a few years later, in Freightliner Corporation 
v. Myrick, 514 U.S. 280 (1995), the Supreme Court explained that Cipollone did “not 
establish a rule” that “implied pre-emption cannot exist when Congress has chosen 
to include an express pre-emption clause in a statute.” Freightliner, 514 U.S. at 287–


4    As discussed above, the State asserts that it does not interpret the Act to apply to federal 
elections, and I have concluded in any event that the Act is likely expressly preempted as to federal 
elections.                                                                
89. Instead, “[t]he fact that an express definition of the pre-emptive reach of a statute 
‘implies’—i.e., supports a reasonable inference—that Congress did not intend to pre-
empt other matters does not mean that the express clause entirely forecloses any 

possibility  of  implied  pre-emption.”  Id.  at  288.  “At  best,  Cipollone  supports  an 
inference that an express pre-emption clause forecloses implied pre-emption.” Id. at 
289.                                                                      
    The Cipollone inference against implied preemption likely applies here. The 
Act contains an express preemption provision that states that FECA supersedes and 
preempts  state  law  only  “with  respect  to  election  to  Federal  office.”  52  U.S.C. 

§ 30143(1). That express language does not entirely foreclose the possibility that 
Congress intended FECA’s exclusive reach to go beyond federal candidate elections 
to cover state and local elections too, but there is at least an inference that that was 
not Congress’s intent. With the presumption and inference in mind, I turn to whether 
FECA impliedly preempts state regulation of foreign spending in candidate elections 
for state and local office and state referendum elections. Neither the Supreme Court 
nor the First Circuit has addressed this issue.                           

         2.   Conflict Preemption                                        
    Conflict  preemption  is  “where  compliance  with  both  federal  and  state 
regulations is a physical impossibility or where state law stands as an obstacle to the 
accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of Congress.” Gade, 
505 U.S. at 98 (internal citations and quotations omitted). “What is a sufficient 
obstacle is a matter of judgment, to be informed by examining the federal statute as 
a whole and identifying its purpose and intended effects.” Me. Forest Prods. Council, 
51 F.4th at 6 (quoting Crosby v. Nat’l Foreign Trade Council, 530 U.S. 363, 373 
(2000)). Thus, in order to decide the preemptive effect of FECA on the Act, I have to 
“juxtapose the state and federal laws, demarcate their respective scopes, and evaluate 

the extent to which they are in tension.” See Teper v. Miller, 82 F.3d 989, 993 (11th 
Cir. 1996).                                                               
              a.   Juxtaposition  of  Federal  and  State  Provisions  on 
                   Foreign Involvement in Elections                      
    Under  FECA,  a  foreign  national  is  prohibited  from  making,  directly  or 
indirectly,  “a  contribution  or  donation  of  money  or  other  thing  of  value  . . .  in 
connection with a Federal, State, or local election.” 52 U.S.C. § 30121(a). FECA 
defines “foreign national” as either an individual who is not a United States citizen 
or national, and who is not lawfully admitted for permanent residence, or “a foreign 
principal.”  52  U.S.C.  §  30121(b).  The  term  “foreign  principal”  includes  “the 
government  of  a  foreign  country”  and  “a  partnership,  association,  corporation, 

organization, or other combination of persons organized under the laws of or having 
its principal place of business in a foreign country.” 22 U.S.C. § 611(b). 
    The Maine Act provides that “[a] foreign government-influenced entity may not 
make, directly or indirectly, a contribution, expenditure, independent expenditure, 
electioneering communication or any other donation or disbursement of funds to 
influence the nomination or election of a candidate or the initiation or approval of a 

referendum.” 21-A M.R.S. § 1064(2). A “foreign government-influenced entity” means: 
    (1) A foreign government; or                                         
    (2) A firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization or other 
    entity  with  respect  to  which  a  foreign  government  or  foreign 
    government-owned entity[5]:                                          
         (a)  Holds,  owns,  controls  or  otherwise  has  direct  or  indirect 
         beneficial  ownership  of  5%  or  more  of  the  total  equity, 
         outstanding voting shares, membership units or other applicable 
         ownership interests; or                                         
         (b) Directs, dictates, controls or directly or indirectly participates 
         in the decision-making process with regard to the activities of the 
         firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization or other 
         entity to influence the nomination or election of a candidate or the 
         initiation  or  approval  of  a  referendum,  such  as  decisions 
         concerning  the  making  of  contributions,  expenditures,      
         independent  expenditures,  electioneering  communications  or  
         disbursements.                                                  
21-A M.R.S. § 1064(1)(E).                                                 
    I have already found that FECA preempts regulation of foreign spending in 
federal candidate elections. That leaves referenda and state and local candidate 
elections to review for conflict preemption. Because FECA’s intended scope and the 
rationale for regulating these two categories of elections differ, I consider them 
separately.                                                               
              b.   Referenda                                             
    FECA prohibits any foreign national (which includes a foreign government or 
a foreign corporation) from contributing or donating money “in connection with a 
Federal,  State,  or  local  election.”  52  U.S.C.  §  30121(a).  Under  FECA,  the  term 
“election” means “a general, special, primary, or runoff election” or “a convention or 
caucus of a political party which has authority to nominate a candidate.” 52 U.S.C. 

5    A “foreign government-owned entity” is “any entity in which a foreign government owns or 
controls more than 50% of its equity or voting shares.” 21-A M.R.S. § 1064(1)(F). 
§ 30101(1).  The  Supreme  Court  has  said  that  FECA  “regulates  only  candidate 
elections, not referenda or other issue-based ballot measures.” McIntyre v. Ohio 
Elections Comm’n, 514 U.S. 334, 356 (1995); see also FEC v. Bluman, 800 F. Supp. 2d 

281,  284  (D.D.C.  2011)  (then-Judge  Kavanaugh,  interpreting  Section  30121’s 
identically-worded  predecessor,  stated  “[t]his  statute  . . .  does  not  bar  foreign 
nationals from issue advocacy—that is, speech that does not expressly advocate the 
election or defeat of a specific candidate.”). And the Federal Election Commission 
(“FEC”)6 interprets FECA as excluding referenda. See MUR 7523 (Stop I-186 to 
Protect  Mining  and  Jobs,  et  al.),  at  5  n.18  (FEC  Oct.  4,  2021),  available  at 

https://www.fec.gov/files/legal/murs/7523/7523_23.pdf (noting that there has been a 
“longstanding distinction between elections and ballot initiative activity” and that 
the FEC has advised “that ballot measure activity was ‘nonelection activity’ that 
foreign nationals may lawfully engage in so long as it is not connected to a candidate’s 
campaign”). In fact, the FEC recently recommended “that Congress amend FECA’s 
foreign national prohibition to include ballot initiatives, referenda and any recall 
elections not covered by the current version of FECA.” Legis. Recommendations of 

the  FEC  2023,  at  7,  available  at  https://www.fec.gov/resources/cms-content/ 


6    Congress created the Federal Election Commission (“FEC”) to “administer[ ] and enforc[e]” 
the Federal Election Campaign Act (“FECA”) and it delegated to the FEC “extensive rulemaking and 
adjudicative powers.” See Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 109–10 (1976). The Supreme Court has 
instructed that the FEC “is precisely the type of agency to which deference should presumptively be 
afforded.” FEC v. Democratic Senatorial Campaign Comm., 454 U.S. 27, 37 (1981); see also Becker v. 
FEC, 230 F.3d 381, 390 (1st Cir. 2000) (affording Chevron deference to the FEC’s interpretation of 
several FECA statutory provisions because “[t]he FEC is the type of agency which is entitled to such 
deference where congressional intent is ambiguous”). Cf. Teper v. Miller, 82 F.3d 989, 997–98 (11th 
Cir. 1996) (noting tension inherent in deferring to the FEC in cases involving preemption). 
documents/legrec2023.pdf.7  Because  FECA  does  not  currently  cover  referenda,  I 
conclude that it likely does not preempt the Act with respect to regulation of foreign 
spending on a referendum.                                                 

              c.   State and Local Candidate Elections                   
    By contrast, FECA’s prohibition on contributions by foreign nationals does 
extend to State and local candidate elections. FECA prohibits “foreign principals”—
including  foreign  governments  and  foreign-based  corporations—from  “directly  or 
indirectly” spending “in connection with a Federal, State, or local election” of a 
candidate. 52 U.S.C. § 30121(a). But FECA does not on its face prohibit domestic 
subsidiaries of foreign corporations from making donations or contributions to such 

elections.  The  Versant  Plaintiffs argue that  this  omission  “should  be  viewed  as 
Congress’s considered choice, not an inadvertent hole meant to be filled by state 
regulation.” Versant PI Mot. 12. The Versant Plaintiffs assert that, because the 
failure to regulate domestic subsidiaries of foreign corporations was by design, the 
Act’s prohibition on spending by United States companies with foreign ownership 
conflicts with Congress’s intention. Versant PI Mot. 12. The State counters that the 

fact that FECA does not go as far as the Act in regulating foreign influence in 
elections is insufficient to overcome the presumption against preemption. State Opp’n 
57.                                                                       


7    In its recommendation, the FEC explained that it considered foreign national donations made 
in opposition to a Montana ballot initiative and “determined that FECA’s foreign national prohibition 
does not reach ballot initiatives that do not appear to be linked to an office-seeking candidate at the 
federal, state or local level.” Legis. Recommendations at 7; see also MUR 7523 (Stop I-186 to Protect 
Mining and Jobs, et al.), at 3–4, available at https://www.fec.gov/files/legal/murs/7523/7523_23.pdf. 
    The history of the foreign prohibition on spending shows that Congress has 
been active in this area over the last fifty years. Even before FECA was introduced 
in 1971, Congress had, in 1966, “amended the Foreign Agents Registration Act to 

prohibit foreign governments and entities from contributing to American political 
candidates.” United States v. Singh, 979 F.3d 697, 709 (9th Cir. 2020) (citing Pub. L. 
No. 89-486, § 8, 80 Stat. 244, 248–49). When Congress amended FECA in 1974, it 
expanded on the existing bans by prohibiting any “foreign national”—defined as a 
foreign principal under the Foreign Agents Registration Act or an individual who is 
not a United States citizen or lawful permanent resident—from making contributions 

to candidates. Federal Election Campaign Act Amendments of 1974, Pub. L. No. 93–
443, 88 Stat. 1263.                                                       
    “But those restrictions did not eliminate the possibility of foreign citizens 
influencing American elections,” Bluman, 800 F. Supp. 2d at 283, and “suspicions of 
foreign influence in American elections remained a pervasive concern.” Singh, 979 
F.3d  at  709.  The  1996  election  cycle  prompted  the  Senate  Committee  on 
Governmental  Affairs  to  investigate  foreign  campaign  contributions.  Id.  “The 

Committee found that foreign citizens had used soft-money contributions to political 
parties to essentially buy access to American political officials.” Bluman, 800 F. Supp. 
2d at 283. In response to the Committee’s report, Congress (eventually) passed the 
Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 (“BCRA”), which amended FECA and   
further  limited  foreign  nationals’  ability  to  participate  in  elections.  Bipartisan 
Campaign Reform Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-155, § 303, 116 Stat. 81, 96; see Singh, 
979 F.3d at 709. FECA, now with the BCRA amendments, bans foreign nationals 
from directly or indirectly making contributions or donations to a committee of a 
political party or “in connection with a Federal, State, or local election.” 52 U.S.C. 

§ 30121 (formerly cited as 2 U.S.C. § 441e but editorially reclassified as 52 U.S.C. 
§ 30121).                                                                 
    In support of its argument that Congress intended not to regulate certain 
foreign-related entities that the Act encompasses, the Versant Plaintiffs point to FEC 
rulemaking after BCRA amended FECA. Versant PI Mot. 10–12. The FEC had sought 
comments on whether FECA’s use of the word “ ‘indirectly’ should be interpreted to 

cover U.S. subsidiaries of foreign corporations that make non-Federal donations with 
corporate  funds  or  that  have  a  separate  segregated  fund  that  makes  Federal 
contributions.”  67  Fed.  Reg.  69928,  69943  (Nov.  19,  2002).  BCRA’s  sponsors 
commented  that  “Congress  in  this  legislation  did  not  address  ‘contributions  by 
foreign-owned  U.S.  corporations,  including  U.S.  subsidiaries  of  foreign 
corporations.’ ” Id.                                                      
    At this preliminary stage, Versant has not met its burden of showing that 

Congress’s silence on the issue of contributions made by American subsidiaries of 
corporations with foreign ownership in non-federal elections means that Congress 
intended to preempt state efforts to regulate such contributions at both the state and 
local level. In enacting BCRA, Congress intended to include candidate elections for 
state and local office in FECA’s prohibitive sweep. See Singh, 979 F.3d at 709. And 
the FEC recently noted that Section 30121’s reach to state and local elections is 
“exceptional” given that FECA “otherwise is limited to federal elections.” Legis. 
Recommendations at 7. But the fact that FECA covers state and local elections does 
not mean that the Act is in conflict.                                     

    It is true that “the United States has a compelling interest . . . in limiting the 
participation of foreign citizens in activities of American democratic self-government, 
and in thereby preventing foreign influence over the U.S. political process.” Bluman, 
800  F.  Supp. 2d  at 288.  The  State,  however,  has  an  equally  strong  interest  in 
regulating its own state and local elections. And allowing the State of Maine to 
continue to exercise its traditional powers in the area of state and local candidate 

elections likely will not hinder Congress’s intentions as set forth in FECA.  
    Further,  when  Congress  added  the  Section  30121  prohibition  preventing 
foreign nationals from contributing in federal, state, and local elections, it could also 
have amended the express preemption provision in Section 30143 to include state and 
local candidate elections along with those for federal office. But it did not.  
    Ultimately, whether the Act is in conflict with FECA’s prohibition on foreign 
participation in state and local candidate elections is a close question, but I believe it 

is likely that Congress intended FECA’s prohibition as a floor, and it did not intend 
to prohibit states from doing more to regulate foreign government influence on state 
and local elections. The Versant Plaintiffs’ arguments to the contrary do not overcome 
the presumption and inference against preemption. Accordingly, I find that the Act 
is likely not impliedly preempted because it conflicts with FECA.         
         3.   Field Preemption8                                          
    Field preemption occurs when states try to “regulat[e] conduct in a field that 
Congress, acting within its proper authority, has determined must be regulated by 

its exclusive governance.” Arizona, 567 U.S. at 399. “Where Congress occupies an 
entire  field,  . . .  even  complementary  state  regulation  is  impermissible.  Field 
preemption reflects a congressional decision to foreclose any state regulation in the 
area, even if it is parallel to federal standards.” Id. at 401. Thus, the critical question 
in field preemption is whether the “federal law so thoroughly occupies a legislative 
field as to make reasonable the inference that Congress left no room for the States to 
supplement it.” Cipollone, 505 U.S. at 517 (quotation omitted).           

    The same reasons discussed above with respect to conflict preemption apply to 
the field preemption analysis.9 Versant points to the fact that Section 30121 prohibits 
foreign spending in federal, state, and local elections in support of its field preemption 
argument,  and  it  suggests  that,  under  the  federal  scheme,  Congress  made  a 
deliberate choice to not include domestic corporations with foreign shareholders in 
FECA’s ban on foreign principals’ spending. But, as the Choi court recently explained 

in a similar case, “Congress does not preempt state law every time it considers 

8    Although  the  field  preemption  argument  was  not  developed  in  Versant’s  motion  for 
preliminary injunction, I address it briefly here because they alleged field preemption in their 
complaint and maintained at oral argument that Congress through FECA’s federal scheme has 
occupied the field of foreign nationals’ campaign spending. See Versant Compl. ¶¶ 107, 110. 
9    “Indeed, field pre-emption may be understood as a species of conflict pre-emption: A state law 
that falls within a pre-empted field conflicts with Congress’ intent (either express or plainly implied) 
to exclude state regulation.” English v. Gen. Elec. Co., 496 U.S. 72, 79 n.5 (1990). 
regulating a topic but ultimately declines to do so.” 2023 WL 8803357, at *12; see P.R. 
Dep’t of Consumer Affs. v. Isla Petroleum Corp., 485 U.S. 495, 503 (1988) (explaining 
that “deliberate federal inaction” does not “always imply pre-emption”). And I agree 

with the Choi court’s observation that “when Congress regulates, it just as often 
creates a floor rather than a uniform rule preempting stricter state laws.” 2023 WL 
8803357, at *12. On the preliminary injunction record before me, that appears to be 
the case, and the Versant Plaintiffs have not met their burden of showing “that 
Congress intended federal law to occupy [the] field exclusively.” Freightliner, 514 U.S. 
at 287. Therefore, Versant is not likely to succeed on their field preemption argument. 

    Having concluded that FECA likely preempts the Act insofar as it regulates 
elections for federal office, I move on to consider the First Amendment arguments 
only in the context of referenda and state and local candidate elections. 
II.  First Amendment                                                      
    Under Citizens United v. FEC, 558 U.S. 310, 365–66 (2010), corporations have 
a First Amendment right to engage in political speech, which includes certain types 
of  campaign-related  spending.  Among  other  questions,  this  case  asks  whether 

domestic  corporations  with  some  foreign  government  ownership  also  have  this 
right.10                                                                  


10   The Citizens United decision dealt with the First Amendment rights of corporations generally, 
but  it  did  not  resolve  whether  these  rights  also  apply  to  domestic  corporations  with  foreign 
shareholders. Citizens United v. FEC, 558 U.S. 310, 362 (2010). The Supreme Court has since held 
that “foreign organizations operating abroad have no First Amendment rights.” Agency for Int’l Dev. 
v. All. for Open Soc’y Int’l, Inc., 140 S. Ct. 2082, 2088 (2020). This subsequent authority provides some 
guidance, but it does not address or resolve the open questions this case presents. 
    A.   Facial Challenge                                                
    CMP  and  Versant  (collectively,  the  “Corporate  Plaintiffs”)  assert  that 
subsection 2 of the Act is facially unconstitutional because it violates the First 

Amendment.  In  general,  “facial  challenges  leave  no  room  for  particularized 
considerations and must fail as long as the challenged regulation has any legitimate 
application.” Gaspee Project v. Mederos, 13 F.4th 79, 92 (1st Cir. 2021). However, First 
Amendment facial challenges based on overbreadth are different. They succeed if “a 
‘substantial  number’  of  [the  law’s]  applications  are  unconstitutional,  ‘judged  in 
relation to the statute’s plainly legitimate sweep.’ ” Wash. State Grange v. Wash. 
State Republican Party, 552 U.S. 442, 449 n.6 (2008) (quoting New York v. Ferber, 

458 U.S. 747, 769–71 (1982)).                                             
    B.   Level of Scrutiny                                               
    The Corporate Plaintiffs maintain that subsection 2 of the Act is subject to 
strict scrutiny. Versant PI Mot. 14–15; Central Maine Power Company’s Reply in 
Supp. of its Mot. for Prelim. Inj. (“CMP  Reply”) 1–2 (ECF No. 52). The State 
advocates for more lenient “closely drawn” scrutiny. State Opp’n 13–15. Based on my 
review  of  the  parties’  authorities,  including  Sindicato  Puertorriqueño  de 

Trabajadores v. Fortuño, 699 F.3d 1 (1st Cir. 2012), I conclude that strict scrutiny is 
the appropriate standard of review. Strict scrutiny requires that the State show that 
the Act (1) furthers a compelling interest; and (2) is narrowly tailored to achieve that 
interest. Citizens United, 558 U.S. at 340.                               
    C.   Compelling Interest                                             
    The first step of strict scrutiny analysis is to assess whether the State has 
articulated a compelling governmental interest. The State identifies an interest in 

“limiting foreign-government influence in its elections” and an interest in “limiting 
the appearance of such influence.” State Opp’n 23. The Corporate Plaintiffs respond 
that  the  State’s  identified  interests  cannot  support  restrictions  on  spending  on 
elections  or  referenda  by  domestic  corporations  with  foreign  government 
shareholders. Versant PI Mot. 16–17; CMP Reply 4–5.                       
    Neither the Supreme Court nor the First Circuit has weighed in on the First 
Amendment rights of domestic corporations with some foreign government ownership 

to spend money on elections and referenda. The closest case on point is Bluman v. 
Federal Election Commission. The plaintiffs in Bluman were two foreign citizens 
temporarily living in the United States on work visas. 800 F. Supp. 2d at 282. They 
wanted to make financial contributions to candidates in federal and state elections, 
print flyers supporting a presidential candidate to distribute in a park, and contribute 
money to national political parties and political groups. Id. at 285. But FECA’s 

prohibition on foreign national involvement in elections barred these activities. Id. at 
282–83 (citing 2 U.S.C. § 441e(a)). In upholding the law, then-Judge Kavanaugh 
wrote  that  the  United  States  “has  a  compelling  interest  for  purposes  of  First 
Amendment analysis in limiting the participation of foreign citizens in activities of 
American democratic self-government, and in thereby preventing foreign influence 
over  the  U.S.  political  process.”  Id.  at  288.  This  interest  was  based  on  the 
“straightforward principle” that “foreign citizens do not have a constitutional right to 
participate  in,  and  thus  may  be  excluded  from,  activities  of  democratic  self-
government.” Id. The Bluman court noted that its holding would extend to foreign 
corporations, but it did not address “the circumstances under which a corporation 

may be considered a foreign corporation for purposes of First Amendment analysis.” 
Id. at 292 n.4. The Supreme Court summarily affirmed, 565 U.S. 1104 (2012), which 
makes the Bluman decision binding precedent. See Hicks v. Miranda, 422 U.S. 332, 
344–45 (1975).                                                            
         1.   Interest  in  Limiting  Foreign  Government  Influence  in 
              Candidate Elections                                        
    Bluman supports the State’s claim that it has a compelling interest when it 
comes  to  limiting  foreign  government  influence  in  candidate  elections.  Bluman 
approved limiting the participation of foreign citizens and foreign corporations “in 
activities of American democratic self-government” for the purpose of “preventing 
foreign influence over the U.S. political process.” Bluman, 800 F. Supp. 2d at 288; see 

also Bluman, 800 F. Supp. 2d at 292 n.4 (“Our holding means, of course, that foreign 
corporations  are  likewise  barred  from  making  contributions  and  expenditures 
prohibited by 2 U.S.C. § 441e(a).”). This interest extends to the State interest here in 
limiting foreign government influence in candidate elections.             
    CMP argues that this interest is not compelling when it comes to corporations 
with just some foreign government ownership,11 because, unlike the foreign nationals 

in Bluman, such entities could be Maine companies (like CMP itself) led by United 

11   I use foreign government “ownership” as a shorthand for the full definition in 21-A M.R.S. 
§ 1064(1)(E)(2)(a).                                                       
States citizens with long-term stakes in issues decided by Maine’s elections. CMP PI 
Mot. 12. This argument essentially takes aim at the Act’s 5% foreign government 
ownership threshold. See 21-A M.R.S. § 1064(1)(E)(2)(A). The argument is that 5%  

foreign government ownership  is not foreign enough to sustain an interest in limiting 
the  First  Amendment  rights  of  domestic  corporations  to  participate  in  election 
activities. But whether this amount of foreign government ownership is sufficient to 
justify the Act is better tested on narrow tailoring, not whether a compelling interest 
exists in the first place.12 Bluman thus likely extends to the State’s articulated 
interest here with respect to state and local candidate elections.        

         2.   Interest  in  Limiting  Foreign  Government  Influence  in 
              Referenda Elections                                        
    A much closer question is whether Bluman can support the State’s compelling 
interest when it comes to referenda elections. Bluman “does not address” and “should 
not be read to support” bans on “issue advocacy” or “speaking out on issues of public 
policy” by foreign individuals. 800 F. Supp. 2d at 292. But Bluman does support 
excluding those who are not “members of the American political community” from 
participating in “activities of American democratic self-government” in the interest 
of “preventing foreign influence over the U.S. political process.” 800 F. Supp. 2d at 
288, 290. When Maine citizens vote on referenda they are certainly participating in 
an activity of democratic self-government. See Me. Const. art. IV, pt. 3, § 18 (Maine 



12   I recognize that the court in Minnesota Chamber of Commerce v. Choi, --- F. Supp. 3d ----, 2023 
WL 8803357, at *6 (D. Minn. Dec. 20, 2023) evaluated “[t]he scope of the compelling interest” on prong 
one of the strict scrutiny test. But I will save this analysis for prong two. 
citizens have the right to enact legislation directly by popular vote). At this initial 
stage of the case, and based on the reasoning that follows on narrow tailoring, I 
assume without deciding that limiting foreign government influence in referenda 

elections is a compelling interest.                                       
         3.   Interest  in  Limiting  the  Appearance  of  Foreign       
              Government Influence in Elections                          
    In  addition  to  the  interest  in  limiting  foreign  government  influence  in 
candidate and referenda elections, the State also asserts an independent interest in 
limiting the appearance of such influence. State Opp’n 20–21. For support, the State 
cites  cases  that  endorse  avoiding  the  appearance  of  corruption  as  a  compelling 
government interest. State. Resp. 20 (citing Nixon v. Shrink Mo. Gov’t PAC, 528 U.S. 
377, 390 (2000); Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 27 (1976)). In addition, the State points 
to the historic margin of victory for the Act as evidence that Maine voters do indeed 
perceive that foreign government influence in elections is an urgent problem. State 

Opp’n 21. The Corporate Plaintiffs maintain that this interest does not make sense 
in the context of referenda, and moreover, that the “appearance of” justification has 
been strictly confined to cases involving quid pro quo corruption. CMP PI Mot. 7–8; 
Versant PI Mot. 16–17; CMP Reply 8–9.                                     
    Bluman,  the  authority  for  the  compelling  interest  in  limiting  foreign 
government influence in candidate elections, says nothing about an independent 

“appearance” interest. And I am not convinced that the interest in avoiding the 
appearance of quid pro quo corruption also means there is an interest in avoiding the 
appearance of foreign government influence. Ultimately I agree with the Corporate 
Plaintiffs that the appearance interest is likely not compelling.         
    D.   Narrow Tailoring                                                

    The  Corporate  Plaintiffs  contend  that  even  if  there  is  a  compelling  state 
interest, the Act is not narrowly tailored. CMP PI Mot. 9–13; Versant PI Mot. 17–20. 
They primarily focus their tailoring analysis on the inclusion of entities that are 5% 
or more owned by foreign governments or foreign government-owned entities in the 
Act’s definition of “foreign government-influenced entit[ies].” Versant PI Mot. 19–21; 
CMP PI Mot. 13; Versant Reply 8–9; CMP Reply 3–5. In the context of their facial 
challenge, the Corporate Plaintiffs’ overbreadth argument is that too many of the 

Act’s applications are unconstitutional as compared to the applications that are 
constitutionally permissible.                                             
    As explained above, subsection 2 of the Act bars campaign spending by any 
“foreign government-influenced entity,” of which there are three types. 21-A M.R.S. 
§ 1064(1)(E). In broad strokes they are: (1) foreign governments13; (2) entities that 
are 5% or more foreign government-owned14; and (3) entities with actual foreign 

government influence.15                                                   




13   21-A M.R.S. § 1064(1)(E)(1).                                         
14   21-A M.R.S. § 1064(1)(E)(2)(a).                                      
15   21-A M.R.S. § 1064(1)(E)(2)(b).                                      
         1.   Foreign Governments                                        
    Subsection 2 of the Act is likely narrowly tailored when it comes to foreign 
governments (the 21-A M.R.S. § 1064(1)(E)(1) category). Foreign governments are 

obviously not members of the American political community, and like the foreign 
citizens in Bluman, they likely can be barred from election spending in Maine. See 
Bluman, 800 F. Supp. 2d at 288. FECA already bars foreign governments from 
spending on candidate elections, 52 U.S.C. § 30121, but it provides no protection to 
Maine on its referenda elections. See McIntyre, 514 U.S. at 356; MUR 7523 (In re Stop 
I-186 to Protect Mining and Jobs et al.) at *3–4. Thus, this part of the Act is necessary 
to further Maine’s interest in limiting foreign government influence in its elections. 

         2.   5% or More Foreign Government Owned                        
    I reach, however, a different conclusion on the narrow tailoring question when 
it comes to entities with 5% or more foreign government ownership (the 21-A M.R.S. 
§ 1064(1)(E)(2)(a) category). The Act provides that: a “foreign government-influenced 
entity” means: “[a] firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization or other 
entity with respect to which a foreign government or foreign government-owned 
entity: [h]olds, owns, controls or otherwise has direct or indirect beneficial ownership 

of 5% or more of the total equity, outstanding voting shares, membership units or 
other applicable ownership interests.” 21-A M.R.S. § 1064(1)(E)(2)(a).    
    CMP’s  main  argument  is  that  this  subsection  of  the  Act  shuts  domestic 
corporations out of the political process based on too small a percentage of foreign 
government ownership, which they maintain is a faulty proxy for actual foreign 
government influence. CMP PI Mot. 13; see also Versant PI Mot. 20–21. They further 
contend that this ban cannot be squared with Citizens United, which held that 
corporations have a First Amendment right to spend on campaigns. CMP PI Mot. 6.  
    I agree that a 5% foreign ownership threshold would prohibit a substantial 

amount  of  protected  speech.  I  cannot  reconcile  the  Supreme  Court’s  holding  in 
Citizens United with a law that would bar a company like CMP—incorporated in 
Maine, governed by a Board of Directors comprised of United States citizens and run 
by United States citizen executive officers who reside in Maine—from campaign 
spending. See Citizens United, 558 U.S. at 362; CMP Compl. ¶¶ 16, 18. The 5% 
threshold would deprive the United States citizen shareholders—potentially as much 

as 95% of an entity’s shareholders—of their First Amendment right to engage in 
campaign spending. Simply put, it would be overinclusive.                 
    The State defends the 5% threshold by pointing out that it is not random; 
rather, in the federal securities context, “it is the amount of ownership that federal 
securities law recognizes as so significant as to require a special disclosure if it occurs 
in a publicly traded company.” State Opp’n 24; see 15 U.S.C. § 78m(d)(1)–(3). CMP 
counters that the 5% figure used by the securities laws is not a proxy for control, but 

rather a signal to the marketplace that a hostile takeover may be in the offing. CMP 
Reply at 11. See also Morales v. Quintel Ent., Inc., 249 F.3d 115, 123 (2d Cir. 2001) 
(“By requiring the disclosure of information by a potential takeover bidder, the 
[Williams]  Act  strikes  a  careful  balance  among  the  interests  of  the  bidder,  the 
incumbent management in defending against such bid by explaining its position, and 
the shareholders so that they can evaluate the bidders’ intentions in deciding whether 
to throw in their lot with them.”). It strikes me that the 5% foreign government 
ownership found in Maine’s Act was arbitrarily chosen.16 Moreover, I do not see how 
it can survive the observation in Citizens United that a restriction “not limited to 

corporations  or  associations  that  were  created  in  foreign  countries  or  funded 
predominantly  by  foreign  shareholders”  would  be  overbroad.  558  U.S.  at  362 
(emphasis added); see also Agency for Int’l Dev. v. All. for Open Soc’y Int’l, 140 S. Ct. 
2082, 2087 (2020) (foreign organizations operating abroad have no First Amendment 
rights, notwithstanding their affiliations with United States organizations).  
    Nor, at this stage, has the State offered any evidence that a foreign government 

or foreign government-owned entity with less than full ownership of a domestic entity 
has exerted influence over that entity’s election spending in Maine. This evidence 
may come with discovery, but without it, I cannot say that this part of the law is 
narrowly tailored.17                                                      
         3.   Actual Foreign Government Influence                        
    Unlike the other two categories, the third category of foreign government 
influence—found  at  21-A  M.R.S.  §  1064(1)(E)(2)(b)—targets  entities  based  on 



16   I  note  that  the  legislative  history  provided  by  the  State  shows  that  an  earlier  bill 
(Representative Ackley’s bill from the 129th Legislature) had restricted spending only for contributors 
who were “at least half foreign-based.” Test. of Sen. Richard Bennett Before the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans & Legal Affairs, March 15, 2021 (ECF No. 47-8 at 17). And L.D. 194, which 
passed but was vetoed by the Governor, set the percentage for foreign ownership at 10%. (ECF No. 47-
8 at 4).                                                                  
17   I note that simply pointing to outsized spending by entities that are 5% or more owned by a 
foreign government or foreign government-owned entity is not sufficient. See Citizens United, 558 U.S. 
at 349–50 (rejecting the “antidistortion rationale” for restricting corporate campaign spending).   
conduct, rather than identity or ownership. It provides that a “foreign government-
influenced entity” means:                                                 
    A  firm,  partnership,  corporation,  association,  organization  or  other 
    entity  with  respect  to  which  a  foreign  government  or  foreign 
    government-owned entity: . . . [d]irects, dictates, controls or directly or 
    indirectly participates in the decision-making process with regard to the 
    activities of the firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization 
    or other entity to influence the nomination or election of a candidate or 
    the initiation or approval of a referendum, such as decisions concerning 
    the making of contributions, expenditures, independent expenditures, 
    electioneering communications or disbursements.                      
21-A M.R.S. § 1064(1)(E)(2)(b).                                           
    At first blush, the conduct that subsection (E)(2)(b) targets—participation by 
foreign governments or foreign government-owned entities in decision-making on 
election spending—fits the state’s interest in limiting foreign government influence 
in its elections more closely than the second category. The (E)(2)(b) subsection also 
bears a close resemblance to a definition found in a FECA regulation, 11 C.F.R. 
§ 110.20(i),18 which has been in effect for over twenty years without any significant 
challenge.                                                                
    The Corporate Plaintiffs argue that the subsection (E)(2)(b) category is overly 
broad and too unclear to follow. See CMP PI Mot. 10–11, 13, 17; Versant PI Mot. 24–
25. CMP claims, for example, that under the State’s interpretation of “directly or 

18   “Participation by foreign nationals in decisions involving election-related activities. A foreign 
national shall not direct, dictate, control, or directly or indirectly participate in the decision-making 
process of any person, such as a corporation, labor organization, political committee, or political 
organization with regard to such person’s Federal or non-Federal election-related activities, such as 
decisions concerning the making of contributions, donations, expenditures, or disbursements in 
connection  with  elections  for  any  Federal,  State,  or  local  office  or  decisions  concerning  the 
administration of a political committee.” 11 C.F.R. § 110.20(i).          
indirectly participates in the decision-making process” a foreign government-owned 
entity could send an unsolicited email to a domestic corporation with no foreign 
ownership about an election-related issue and the domestic corporation would lose its 

First Amendment right to spend on elections or referenda. CMP Reply 15.   
    At oral argument, the State rejected that broad reading of subsection (E)(2)(b), 
but the State referred to definitions contained in its proposed rules. The Maine 
Commission on Governmental Ethics and Election Practices has proposed definitions 
of  direct  and  indirect  “participation  in  a  decision-making  process.”  See  94-270, 
§ 15(1)(C).19 Besides being difficult to follow, these proposed definitions would appear 

to read out the requirement that the foreign government or foreign government-
owned entity participate in the actual decision-making process. Instead, they make 
the communication of a preference sufficient to “influence” another entity. Thus, a 
domestic corporation could be barred from engaging in otherwise-protected speech 
not based on its own conduct, but based on unsolicited communications from a foreign 
government-owned entity even when no actual influence is shown. This category 
casts an overly broad net, and it is likely to stifle the speech of domestic corporations 

regardless of whether a member of a foreign government or foreign government-


19   The proposed rules state that “To ‘directly participate in a decision-making process’ means to 
communicate a direction or preference concerning the outcome of the decision-making process through 
a person who is an employee or official of a foreign government or an employee, director or member of 
a foreign government-owned entity.” “To ‘indirectly participate in the decision-making process’ means 
to knowingly communicate a direction or preference concerning the outcome of the decision-making 
process using an intermediary, whether or not the intermediary has any formal affiliation with the 
foreign government or foreign government-owned entity.” Notice/Correspondence re: Proposed Rules 
Implementing 21-A MRSA § 1064 (ECF No. 60).                               
owned  entity  has  any  actual  influence  over  their  decision-making  on  campaign 
spending.20  This category is likely unconstitutional.21                  
    E.   Severability                                                    

    Based  on  this  analysis,  I  find  that  a  substantial  number  of  the  Act’s 
applications are likely unconstitutional judged against the Act’s plainly legitimate 
sweep.  It  is  therefore  likely  facially  invalid.  Because  the  5%  or  more  foreign 
ownership category cannot be squared with Supreme Court precedent, and because 
the  State’s  proposed  interpretation  of  direct  and  indirect  participation  is  likely 
overbroad, a substantial portion of the Act—two of the three foreign government-
influenced entity categories—are likely unconstitutional.                 

    Perhaps anticipating that the Act was on shaky First Amendment grounds, 
the State invites me to sever the Act. It maintains that I have the authority to enjoin 
only  the  unconstitutional  portions  or  applications  of  the  Act,  while  letting  the 
constitutionally permissible portions and applications go into effect. State Opp’n 69–
70. Under Maine law, if a provision or application of a law is invalid, but its “invalidity 
does not affect other provisions or applications which can be given effect without the 

invalid provision or application,” the law is severable. 1 M.R.S. § 71(8); see also Nat’l 
Fire Adjustment Co. v. Cioppa, 357 F. Supp. 3d 38, 49 n.13 (D. Me. 2019). However, 

20   Moreover, this definition is likely overly broad to the extent a domestic corporation would lose 
its First Amendment rights by discussing a topic of mutual interest with a foreign government-owned 
entity if that topic was the subject of a referendum.                     
21   My conclusion may change, however, if the State adopts a rule that clarifies that the foreign 
government or foreign government-owned entity must actually participate in the decision-making 
process regarding election spending. Cf. OneAmerica Votes v. State, 23 Wash. App. 2d 951, 983–84 
(Wash. App. Ct. 2022) (distinguishing between debate on issue advocacy on the one hand, and decision-
making on financial support to specific candidates or ballot measures on the other). 
if “the provisions of a statute ‘are so related in substance and object that it is 
impossible to determine that the legislation would have been enacted except as an 
entirety, if one portion offends the Constitution, the whole must fall.’ ” Op. of the 

Justs., 2004 ME 54, ¶ 25, 850 A.2d 1145 (quoting Town of Windham v. LaPointe, 308 
A.2d 286, 292 (1973)).                                                    
    Given the expedited and preliminary nature of this proceeding, I decline to 
sever the Act at this stage. I will reserve those questions until I have the benefit of 
further  briefing  from  all  parties  on  how  these  changes  would  affect  the  Act’s 
remaining provisions.                                                     

    F.   Remaining Preliminary Injunction Factors                        
    “In the First Amendment context, the likelihood of success on the merits is the 
linchpin of the preliminary injunction analysis.” Fortuño, 699 F.3d at 10. Resolution 
of the remaining factors in a First Amendment case necessarily flow from the initial 
likelihood assessment, particularly where plaintiffs are likely to succeed on their 
claim. The loss of First Amendment rights, even briefly, constitutes irreparable 
injury. Id. at 10–11. On the balance of hardships, the Plaintiffs’ “interest in avoiding 

interference  with  their  rights  to  free  speech  outweighs  the  [State’s]  interest  in 
enforcing an unconstitutional [law].” Cutting v. City of Portland, No. 2:13-cv-359-
GZS, 2014 WL 580155, at *10 (D. Me. Feb. 12, 2014).  And finally, the public interest 
could not be served by allowing enforcement of an unconstitutional bar on First 
Amendment-protected political speech. Fortuño, 699 F.3d at 15.            
    Accordingly, a preliminary injunction is required here. Because this is the 
relief sought by each Plaintiff, and preliminary resolution of Versant’s preemption 
claim and the Corporate Plaintiffs’ First Amendment facial challenge requires an 
injunction, I need not reach the Corporate Plaintiffs’ remaining arguments or address 
the arguments of the Electors or the Media Plaintiffs at this time. The Act is enjoined 

while this litigation proceeds.                                           
                         CONCLUSION                                      
    For the reasons stated above, I GRANT the Plaintiffs’ motions for preliminary 
injunction (ECF Nos. 4, 22, 25, 27) and ENJOIN enforcement of 21-A M.R.S. § 1064 

until final judgment is entered in this case.                             

SO ORDERED.                                                               
                                  /s/ Nancy Torresen                                         
                                  United States District Judge           
Dated this 29th day of February, 2024.