UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                           
                   DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                             

Jennifer COTTO, David CUMMINGS,  *                                       
Jamie KIMBALL, Todd MOTON, and  *                                        
Travis MORAN on behalf of themselves and  *                              
all others similarly situated,  *                                        
                               *                                         
     Plaintiffs,               *                                         
                               *                                         
          v.                   *                                         
                               *                                         
Andrea Joy CAMPBELL, Massachusetts  *                                    
Attorney General; Timothy SHUGRUE,  *                                    
Berkshire County District Attorney; Thomas  *                            
M. QUINN, III, Bristol County District  *                                
Attorney; Robert GALIBOS, Cape and  *                                    
Islands District Attorney; Jonathan  *                                   
BLODGETT, Essex County District  *  Civil Action No. 1:18-cv-10354-IT    
Attorney; Anthony GULLUNI, Hampden  *                                    
County District Attorney; Marian RYAN,  *                                
Middlesex County District Attorney;  *                                   
Michael W. MORRISSEY, Norfolk County  *                                  
District Attorney; David E. SULLIVAN,  *                                 
Northwestern District Attorney; Timothy J.  *                            
CRUZ, Plymouth County District Attorney;  *                              
Kevin R. HAYDEN, Suffolk County District  *                              
Attorney; Joseph D. EARLY, JR., Worcester  *                             
County District Attorney; John A. BELLO,  *                              
Administrator of the Trial Court; Christopher  *                         
MASON, Massachusetts State Police  *                                     
Superintendent; SPRINGFIELD POLICE  *                                    
DEPARTMENT; BOSTON POLICE      *                                         
DEPARTMENT; BROCKTON POLICE    *                                         
DEPARTMENT; and FALL RIVER     *                                         
POLICE DEPARTMENT, on behalf of  *                                       
themselves and all others similarly situated,  *                         
                               *                                         
     Defendants.               *                                         
                               *                                         

                     MEMORANDUM & ORDER                                  

                         November 13, 2023                               
TALWANI, D.J.                                                             
    Plaintiffs are five individuals whose Massachusetts drug convictions have been vacated 
and dismissed but whose forfeited property has not been returned to them. They bring this 
putative class action on their own behalf and on behalf of all others similarly situated against 
various Massachusetts state officials and municipal police departments. Invoking the Fourteenth 

and Eighth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution and state statutory and common law, Plaintiffs 
seek the restoration of the forfeited property. Pending before the court are Defendants’ Motions 
to Dismiss [Doc. Nos. 109, 114, 115, 118, 120] asserting, inter alia, that Plaintiffs’ claims are 
barred by sovereign immunity, various abstention doctrines, and the statute of limitations.  
 I.   Background                                                         
   A.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Decisions Vacating Drug Convictions  
    For a period of years beginning in the mid-2000s, two state forensic chemists, Annie 
Dookhan and Sonja Farak, tampered with evidence, falsified drug test results, and committed 
perjury—with repercussions for tens of thousands of defendants charged with drug-related 
offenses. On April 19, 2017, the Single Justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court 

(“SJC”) vacated and dismissed with prejudice 21,587 drug cases that had been tainted by 
Dookhan’s misconduct. Bridgeman v. District Attorney for Suffolk County, SJ-2014-0005 (Apr. 
19, 2017). On June 18, 2018, the Single Justice of the SJC vacated and dismissed with prejudice 
over 7,500 drug cases that had been tainted by Farak’s misconduct. Committee for Public 
Counsel Services v. Attorney General of Massachusetts, SJ-2017-347 (June 18, 2018). On 
October 11, 2018, the SJC held that the convictions of “all defendants who pleaded guilty to a 
drug charge, admitted to sufficient facts on a drug charge, or were found guilty of a drug charge, 
where (i) Farak signed the certificate of analysis; (ii) the conviction was based on 
methamphetamine and the drugs were tested during Farak’s tenure at the Amherst lab; or (iii) the 
drugs were tested at the Amherst lab on or after January 1, 2009, and through January 18, 2013, 
regardless of who signed the certificate of analysis” were vacated and dismissed with prejudice. 
Comm. for Pub. Counsel Servs. v. Attorney Gen., 480 Mass. 700, 734-735, 108 N.E.3d 966 
(Mass. 2018).                                                             

    On March 20, 2019, the Single Justice of the SJC vacated and dismissed with prejudice 
an additional 7,500-plus cases tainted by Farak’s misconduct. Committee for Public Counsel 
Services v. Attorney General of Massachusetts, SJ-2017-347 (Mar. 20, 2019). 
   B.   Commonwealth v. Martinez                                         
    On October 30, 2018, in a case brought by two individuals whose criminal convictions 
had been invalidated, the SJC concluded that the due process clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendment required the repayment of appellants’ probation fees, victim-witness assessments, 
restitution, fines, and court costs. Commonwealth v. Martinez, 480 Mass. 777, 779, 109 N.E.2d 
459 (Mass. 2018). One appellant also sought the return of her civilly forfeited assets, arguing that 
the forfeiture order against her was “for all practical purposes, [] a consequence of the 

invalidated drug convictions” and should therefore also be invalidated as a matter of due process. 
Id. at 791. The SJC disagreed, citing the provision in the Massachusetts Controlled Substances 
Act (“State Act”), Mass. Gen. Laws Ann. ch. 94C, § 47 (West 2018), for a civil in rem forfeiture 
proceeding, which is subject to a different burden of proof than the criminal proceeding. As a 
result of that distinction, the SJC held that the appellant was not entitled to the automatic return 
of her forfeited assets because “[t]he finding of probable cause of nexus that sufficed to order 
forfeiture in the civil proceeding did not depend on the finding in the criminal proceeding of 
sufficient evidence to warrant a finding of guilt on the plea.” Martinez, 480 Mass. at 791. 
However, the SJC also noted that “the reasons for invalidating a conviction potentially may 
warrant relief from [a] civil judgment of forfeiture”—but that the “issue must be separately 
litigated in the civil forfeiture proceeding through a motion for relief from judgment [under Rule 
60(b)].” Id. at 791-792. The SJC did not address whether or to what extent the Rule 60(b) 
procedure should be modified to provide appropriate due process protections for individuals 

whose convictions had been invalidated.                                   
   C.   The State Act                                                    
    The State Act authorizes the forfeiture of, inter alia, money and/or property related to a 
wide range of drug offenses. M.G.L. ch. 94C, § 47(a)(3), (5). A forfeiture proceeding can be 
brought either (a) through a civil in rem action filed in Superior Court, M.G.L. ch. 94C, § 47(d), 
or (b) by motion in a related criminal case in District or Superior Court, M.G.L. ch. 94C, § 47(b). 
    Under the State Act, the prosecution must demonstrate probable cause to institute a 
forfeiture action. M.G.L. ch. 94C, § 47(d). Once probable cause has been established, the 
defendant has the burden to demonstrate that the property is not forfeitable, id., i.e. was not 
“used or intended to be used” to commit or facilitate one of the enumerated drug-related crimes. 

See M.G.L. ch. 94C, § 47(a)(3), (5), (7). Forfeited assets, or the proceeds of the sale of those 
assets, are divided between the prosecuting District Attorneys (or Attorney General) and the 
participating police departments. M.G.L. ch. 94C, § 47(d).                
   D.  The Initial Complaint                                             
    In 2018, Plaintiff Kimball and several others1 sued the Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
and various state and local officials. Complaint [Doc. No. 1]; First Amended Class Action 
Complaint [Doc. No. 27]. With the consent of all parties, the case was stayed from January 31, 


1 Plaintiffs Stacy Foster, Jonathan Riley, and Nicole Westcott have since been terminated from 
this action.                                                              
2019, through October 11, 2022, to permit the resolution of certain matters in state court and by 
settlement. Order Allowing Joint Motion to Stay Proceedings [Doc. No. 39]; Order Lifting Stay 
[Doc. No. 77].                                                            
    E.   The Second Amended Complaint                                    

    On February 3, 2023, Plaintiffs filed the operative Second Amended Class Action 
Complaint [Doc. No. 86] on their own behalf and on behalf of all others similarly situated. 
      1.   Plaintiffs                                                    
         a.   Plaintiff Jennifer Cotto                                   
    On or about April 1, 2008, Springfield police officers arrested Cotto and seized $518 cash 
from her possession. Am. Compl. ¶ 19 [Doc. No. 86]. On January 27, 2009, in Springfield 
District Court, Cotto admitted [that] there were sufficient facts to find her guilty of possessing a 
Class B substance with the intent to distribute. Id. The court entered a continuance without a 
finding and sentenced her to one year of probation. Id. On the day of Cotto’s plea, the prosecutor 
filed a motion in the criminal case to forfeit the $518 that had been seized upon her arrest. Id. As 

part of her plea agreement, Cotto did not contest the forfeiture order. Id. The court allowed the 
forfeiture, and the $518 was split between the Hampden County District Attorney’s Office and 
the Springfield Police Department. Id. On December 13, 2018, due to Farak’s misconduct, the 
SJC vacated the disposition in Cotto’s criminal case. Id. Plaintiffs contend that in light of such 
misconduct, the Commonwealth does not have reliable evidence that Cotto possessed a Class B 
substance. Id. Cotto’s forfeited property has not been returned to her. Id. 
         b.   Plaintiff David Cummings                                   
    On or about January 22, 2010, Marshfield police officers arrested Cummings and seized 
$14,189 in cash from his residence. Id. ¶ 20. On December 2, 2010, in Plymouth District Court, 
Cummings admitted there were sufficient facts to find him guilty of possessing a Class B 
substance with the intent to distribute. Id. As part of Cummings’ plea agreement, both parties 
recommended forfeiture of the $14,189. Id. The court adopted the recommendation, entered a 
continuance without a finding, sentenced Cummings to two years of probation, and ordered that 

Cummings forfeit the $14,189 as a special condition of his probation. Id. The money was divided 
between the Plymouth County District Attorney’s Office and the Marshfield Police Department. 
Id. On April 19, 2017, due to Dookhan's misconduct, the SJC vacated the disposition in 
Cummings’s case. Id. Plaintiffs contend that in light of such misconduct, the Commonwealth 
does not have reliable evidence that Cummings possessed a Class B substance. Id. Cummings’s 
forfeited property has not been returned to him. Id.                      
         c.   Plaintiff Jamie Kimball                                    
    On or about December 15, 2009, Lawrence police officers arrested Kimball and seized 
$2,182 in cash and money orders from her residence. Id. at ¶ 21. On April 27, 2011, in Lawrence 
District Court, Kimball admitted there were sufficient facts to find her guilty of possessing a 

Class A substance. Id. Kimball did not contest the civil in rem forfeiture action filed by the 
prosecution in Essex County Superior Court. Id. On June 30, 2010, a default judgement in that 
action was entered against her. Id. Kimball’s forfeited property was divided between the Essex 
County District Attorney’s Office and the Lawrence Police Department. Id. On April 19, 2017, 
due to Dookhan’s misconduct, the SJC vacated the disposition in Kimball’s case. Id. Plaintiffs 
contend that in light of such misconduct, the Commonwealth does not have reliable evidence that 
Kimball possessed a Class A substance. Id. Kimball’s forfeited property has not been returned to 
her. Id.                                                                  
         d.   Plaintiff Todd Moton                                       
    On or about October 9, 2009, Pittsfield police officers arrested Moton and seized $878 in 
cash from his possession. Id. at ¶ 22. Moton pleaded guilty to various drug offenses. Id. On the 
day of his plea, the prosecution filed a motion to forfeit the $878 in cash; as part of his plea 

agreement, Moton did not contest the forfeiture order. Id. Moton’s forfeited property was divided 
between the Berkshire County District Attorney’s Office and the Pittsfield Police Department. 
Id. On December 13, 2018, due to Farak’s misconduct, the SJC vacated Moton’s convictions. Id. 
Plaintiffs contend that in light of such misconduct, the Commonwealth does not have reliable 
evidence that Moton possessed any controlled substances. Id. Moton’s forfeited property has not 
been returned to him. Id.                                                 
         e.   Plaintiff Travis Moran                                     
    On or about January 6, 2006, Springfield police officers arrested Moran for various drug 
offenses and for carrying a firearm without a license. Id. at ¶ 23. At the time of his arrest, Moran 
was operating a 1994 Honda Accord and possessed $4,528 in cash. Id. On February 3, 2006, the 

Hampden County District Attorney’s Office filed a civil in rem action in Hampden County 
Superior Court against Moran’s money and vehicle. Id. On July 31, 2006, Moran pleaded guilty 
in Hampden County Superior Court to the various drug offenses and to carrying a firearm 
without a license. Id. On the day of the plea hearing, the prosecution filed a motion in the 
criminal case to forfeit the $4,528 in cash and the 1994 Honda Accord. Id. As part of his plea 
agreement, Moran did not contest the motion, which the court allowed. Id. On September 13, 
2006, the District Attorney dismissed the in rem action. Id. Moran’s forfeited property was 
divided between the Hampden County District Attorney’s Office and the Springfield Police 
Department. Id. On April 5, 2018, due to Farak’s misconduct, the SJC vacated Moran’s 
convictions. Id. Plaintiffs contend that in light of such misconduct, the Commonwealth does not 
have reliable evidence that Moton possessed any controlled substances. Id. Moran’s forfeited 
property has not been returned to him. Id.                                
      2.   Defendants                                                    

         a.  Commonwealth Defendants                                     
    Plaintiffs have named as Defendants the following state officials in their official capacity: 
the Massachusetts Attorney General; the Administrator of the Trial Court; the Massachusetts 
State Police Superintendent; and the District Attorneys for Berkshire, Bristol, Cape and Islands, 
Essex, Hampden, Middlesex, Norfolk, Northwestern, Plymouth, Suffolk, and Worcester 
Counties (collectively, the “Commonwealth Defendants”).                   
         b.   Local Government Entities                                  
    Plaintiffs have also named the following local government entities as Defendants: the 
Springfield Police Department; the Boston Police Department; the Brockton Police Department; 
and the Fall River Police Department.2                                    

      3.   Plaintiffs’ Claims                                            
    In light of the invalidation of their convictions, Plaintiffs assert that Defendants are 
unlawfully continuing to withhold Plaintiffs’ forfeited property. Plaintiffs bring claims for 
Declaratory Judgment (Count I), Fourteenth Amendment violations (Counts II-III), an Eighth 
Amendment violation (Count IV), and Unjust Enrichment (Count V). Id. at ¶¶ 151-177.3 


2 Plaintiffs also assert claims against a Defendant Class of law enforcement agencies. Id. at 
¶¶ 141-150.                                                               
3 Plaintiffs also allege that the Defendants did not comply with the State Act in carrying out the 
initial forfeiture actions by, e.g., ordering forfeiture as part of criminal sentences rather than civil 
in rem proceedings, failing to provide adequate notice, and/or moving for forfeiture in simple 
possession cases. Id. at ¶¶ 71-72; 81-83; 85-88.                          
Plaintiffs request injunctive relief in the form of the “return of all Forfeited Property that was 
taken from them in connection with their vacated, wrongful convictions,” as well as notice to all 
Class Members and accounting of all Forfeited Property. Id. at ¶ 179.     
   F.  The Pending Motions                                               

    The Commonwealth Defendants filed a Motion to Dismiss [Doc. No. 109], contending 
that Plaintiffs’ claims are barred by sovereign immunity, Younger abstention, the Rooker-
Feldman doctrine, Colorado River abstention, the statute of limitations, and Rule 12(b)(6) failure 
to state a claim. Commw. Mem. MTD [Doc. No. 110]. The Boston Police Department filed a 
Motion to Dismiss [Doc. No. 114], adopting the Commonwealth Defendants’ arguments about 
Younger abstention, the Rooker-Feldman doctrine, Colorado River abstention, the statute of 
limitations, and Rule 12(b)(6). It also objected to the certification of a Defendant Class 
encompassing all police departments in the Commonwealth. Id. at 2. The Springfield Police 
Department filed a Motion to Dismiss [Doc. No. 118] bringing the same arguments as the Boston 
Police Department. Springfield Mem. MTD [Doc. No. 119]. The Fall River Police Department 

filed a Motion to Dismiss [Doc. No. 120] based on failure to state a claim and the statute of 
limitations. Fall River Mem. MTD [Doc. No. 121]. Finally, the City of Brockton (“Brockton”) 
filed a Motion to Dismiss [Doc. No. 115] claims against the Brockton Police Department, 
adopting the Commonwealth Defendants’ arguments regarding Younger abstention, the Rooker-
Feldman doctrine, and the statute of limitations. Brockton Mem. MTD 12-13 [Doc. No. 116]. 
Brockton also argued that Plaintiffs’ claims against the municipal police departments fail to state 
a Monell claim as required to allege a Section 1983 violation against a local government entity. 
Id. at 8-12.                                                              
    Plaintiffs filed an omnibus Opposition [Doc. No. 126] to the five Motions to Dismiss. 
The Commonwealth Defendants alone filed a Reply [Doc. No. 127].           
 II.  Standard of Review                                                 
    Rule 12(b)(1) is “[t]he proper vehicle for challenging a court’s subject matter 

jurisdiction.” Valentin v. Hosp. Bella Vista, 254 F.3d 358, 362 (1st Cir. 2001). Federal courts are 
courts of limited jurisdiction, so federal jurisdiction is never presumed. Viqueira v. First Bank, 
140 F.3d 12, 16 (1st Cir. 1998). The party asserting jurisdiction has the burden of demonstrating 
the existence of federal jurisdiction. Id. A court should treat all well-pleaded facts as true and 
provide the plaintiff the benefit of all reasonable inferences. Fothergill v. United States, 566 F.3d 
248, 251 (1st Cir. 2009). Dismissal is appropriate only when the facts alleged in the complaint, 
taken as true, do not support a finding of federal subject matter jurisdiction. Id. 
    A challenge to the court’s subject matter jurisdiction must generally be addressed before 
addressing the merits of a case. See Acosta-Ramírez v. Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, 712 F.3d 
14, 18 (1st Cir. 2013) (“Federal courts are obliged to resolve questions pertaining to subject-

matter jurisdiction before addressing the merits of a case”). This is particularly so where a 
defendant claims sovereign immunity, as the “value to the States of their Eleventh Amendment 
immunity . . . is for the most part lost as litigation proceeds past motion practice.” Puerto Rico 
Aqueduct & Sewer Auth. V. Metcalf & Eddy, Inc., 506 U.S. 139, 145 (1993). 
 III.  Discussion                                                        
   A.  Sovereign Immunity                                                
    The Commonwealth Defendants contend that this action must be dismissed based on 
sovereign immunity.4 Sovereign immunity bars suits against the State from proceeding in federal 

court “unless they consent to it in unequivocal terms or unless Congress, pursuant to a valid 
exercise of power, unequivocally expresses its intent to abrogate the immunity.” Green v. 
Mansour, 474 U.S. 64, 68 (1985). “The landmark case of Ex parte Young, 209 U.S. 123, created 
an exception to this general principle by asserting that a suit challenging the constitutionality of a 
state official’s action in enforcing state law is not one against the State.” Id. Because the 
Commonwealth Defendants are all state officials and have been accused of unconstitutional acts, 
Ex parte Young would, at first blush, seem to apply.                      
    However, the Supreme Court has cabined the scope of Ex parte Young in subsequent 
cases. First, the Court “ha[s] refused to extend the reasoning of Young . . . to claims for 
retrospective relief.” Green, 474 U.S. at 68; accord Verizon Md., Inc. v. Public Serv. Comm’n of 

Md., 535 U.S. 635, 645 (2002). This distinction permits “[r]emedies designed to end a 
continuing violation of federal law” that “are necessary to vindicate the federal interest in 
assuring the supremacy of that law” to go forward in federal court, Green, 474 U.S. at 68, “while 
at the same time preserving to an important degree the constitutional immunity of the States” by 
barring suits that effectively seek damages against the State itself, Pennhurst State Sch. & Hosp. 
v. Halderman, 465 U.S. 89, 106 (1984).                                    



4 Although Plaintiffs characterize the Police Departments as “state officials,” Pl.’s Oppo 5 [Doc. 
No. 126], the Police Departments do not assert that they are protected by sovereign immunity. 
    The Supreme Court has cautioned further that even strict adherence to the “prospective 
injunctive relief” distinction will not necessarily lead to an outcome that comports with the 
purposes of sovereign immunity:                                           
    To interpret [Ex parte] Young to permit a federal-court action to proceed in every 
    case where prospective declaratory and injunctive relief is sought against an officer, 
    named in his individual capacity, would be to adhere to an empty formalism and to 
    undermine the principle . . . that Eleventh Amendment immunity represents a real 
    limitation on a federal court’s federal-question jurisdiction.       

Idaho v. Coeur d’Alene Tribe of Idaho, 521 U.S. 261, 270 (1997).          
    Second and relatedly, the Supreme Court has declined to extend Ex parte Young to cases 
where the relief sought, even if equitable in nature, “will to a virtual certainty be paid from state 
funds, and not from the pockets of the individual state officials who were the defendants in the 
action.” Edelman v. Jordan, 415 U.S. 651, 668 (1974). The Court has explained that even where 
a “retroactive award of monetary relief” could be described as a “form of ‘equitable restitution,’ 
it is in practical effect indistinguishable in many aspects from an award of damages against the 
State.” Id.; see also id. at 668-69 (on a claim seeking “equitable restitution” for return of monies 
a taxpayer had paid over to the State pursuant to an allegedly unconstitutional tax exaction, the 
Court “had no hesitation in holding that the taxpayer’s action was a suit against the State, and 
barred by the Eleventh Amendment”); Idaho, 521 U.S. at 277 (“‘[W]hen the action is in essence 
one for the recovery of money from the state, the state is the real, substantial party in interest and 
is entitled to invoke its sovereign immunity from suit even though individual officials are 
nominal defendants.’”) (citing Ford Motor Co. v. Dep’t of Treasury of Ind., 323 U.S. 459, 464 
(1945) (overruled on other grounds)). Thus, in conducting its analysis, the court must rely not 
only on the distinction between prospective and retroactive relief, but also on the “practical 
effect” of that relief against the state treasury. See Edelman, 415 U.S. at 668; accord Quern v. 
Jordan, 440 U.S. 332, 346-47 (1979) (overruled on other grounds) (framing the inquiry as 
whether the remedy “constitute[s] permissible prospective relief or a ‘retroactive award which 
requires the payment of funds from the state treasury’”).                 
    As a result of these nebulous distinctions, “the difference between the type of relief 

barred by the Eleventh Amendment and that permitted under Ex parte Young will not in many 
instances be that between day and night.” Edelman, 415 U.S. at 667.       
    1.  The Ex parte Young exception to sovereign immunity does not apply where the effect 
      of the court’s order would be an award of monetary relief from the state treasury. 
    Defendants argue that this lawsuit is barred by Eleventh Amendment sovereign 
immunity, because the Commonwealth is the “real, substantial party in interest,” Commw. Mem. 
MTD 5 [Doc. No. 110], and because Plaintiffs seek “quintessentially retroactive relief,” id. at 6. 
Further, Defendants argue that the Ex parte Young exception to sovereign immunity does not 
apply because “when a plaintiff sues a state official alleging a violation of federal law, the 
federal court may award an injunction that governs the official’s future conduct, but not one that 
awards retroactive monetary relief.” Id. (citing Pennhurst, 465 U.S. at 102-103). Defendants rely 
heavily on the reasoning in Edelman, see Commw. Mem. MTD 7 [Doc. No. 110], in which the 
Supreme Court held that the Eleventh Amendment barred a claim for “equitable restitution” that 
would have required state defendants to pay back withheld benefits. 415 U.S. at 666-669. 
    In response, Plaintiffs do not deny that their requests for the return of their forfeited 
property and for restitution would have to be satisfied by the payment of money, and that the 

money would come from the State. Instead, they argue that Defendants’ failure to return their 
forfeited property is a continuing violation of federal law that can be remedied by an order from 
the court merely directing the Defendants to comply with the Constitution. Pl.’s Oppo 9-10 [Doc. 
No. 126]. As a result, say the Plaintiffs, an order from the court that the withholding of forfeited 
property is a constitutional violation would fall within the scope of the Ex parte Young 
exception. Id. at 5-6. The Plaintiffs point to Milliken v. Bradley, 433 U.S. 267 (1977), as the 
primary support for this argument.                                        
    In Milliken, the Supreme Court considered whether a federal court could order a state to 

help fund a plan designed to remediate decades of de jure segregation in the Michigan public 
school system. 433 U.S. at 270-271. The district court’s final order directed the Detroit School 
Board and the State to “institute comprehensive programs as to the four educational components 
[reading, in-service training, testing, and counseling] by the start of the . . . school term.” Id. at 
277. The cost of the remedy proposed by the district court—and informed by extensive 
consultation with state experts—“was to be equally borne by the Detroit School Board and the 
State.” Id. The Supreme Court held that the order did not violate the Eleventh Amendment, 
drawing a line between the “future costs of educational components” and “award of an accrued 
monetary liability.” Id. at 289. The Court further explained the distinction:  
    The  educational  components,  which  the  District  Court  ordered  into  effect 
    prospectively, are plainly designed to wipe out continuing conditions of inequality 
    produced by the inherently unequal dual school system long maintained by Detroit. 
    These programs were not, and as a practical matter could not be, intended to wipe 
    the slate clean by one bold stroke, as could a retroactive award of money. 

Id. at 290.                                                               
    Milliken, however, does not help Plaintiffs here. As a threshold matter, Plaintiffs’ 
argument that repayment would remedy a continuing wrong rather than a past one is 
unpersuasive: This sort of “formal distinction” between Defendants’ “continuing obligation” to 
remedy their legal violation and their “ongoing liability” for a past injury is “of the sort [the 
Supreme Court] rejected” in articulating its retroactive relief test. See Papasan v. Allain, 478 
U.S. 265, 280 (1986).                                                     
    Moreover, here—unlike in Milliken—Plaintiffs ask the state for a remedy that is 
effectively “designed to give [them] back something [they] lost”—the direct repayment of their 
forfeited assets. See Whalen v. Mass. Trial Court, 397 F.3d 19, 30 (1st Cir. 2005). That is true 
whether the remedy is styled as an order enjoining Defendants from violating the Constitution by 

withholding assets, or whether the remedy is styled as an order directing the Defendants to return 
those assets. Under either order, the Commonwealth could not rectify its constitutional violation, 
or come into compliance with the law, by any means short of the “return of all Forfeited 
Property.” Thus, to remedy Plaintiffs’ claims that the withholding itself is a violation of federal 
law, this court would have to authorize an “award of an accrued monetary liability,” see 
Milliken, 433 U.S. at 289, that would “to a virtual certainty be paid from state funds,” see 
Edelman, 415 U.S. at 668. That avenue of recourse is barred by the Eleventh Amendment. 
    Further, Plaintiffs’ reliance on First Circuit cases to circumvent sovereign immunity are 
also inapposite: The cases in which the First Circuit has authorized relief that “required payment 
of money directly from a state treasury to bring about compliance” involve instances of a state 

failing to comply with a federal-state assistance program that required the state to make regular 
payments to beneficiaries on a pre-set schedule. See Coal. for Basic Human Needs v. King, 654 
F.2d 838, 842 (1st Cir. 1981) (enjoining states to continue making payments pursuant to the Aid 
to Families with Dependent Children program established by the federal Social Security Act); 
Roselli v. Affleck, 508 F.2d 1277 (1st Cir. 1974) (similar). Notably, the First Circuit has not 
gone so far as to enjoin the state to make payments that were authorized or controlled by state 
law alone. See Coal. for Basic Human Needs, 654 F.2d at 843 (injunction did not include any 
directive as to the Massachusetts program of General Relief, which was also at issue in the case). 
Because this case is neither about funds nor about a federal-state arrangement, the First Circuit’s 
reasoning is inapplicable here.                                           
      2.   The Commonwealth Defendants are Not Stripped of Sovereign Immunity  
    Plaintiffs contend that because they have brought an as-applied challenge to the 

constitutionality of the State Act, sovereign immunity is no bar to their suit in federal court. Pl.’s 
Oppo 11 [Doc. No. 126]. More specifically, Plaintiffs argue that Defendants acted ultra vires in 
enforcing the State Act against them, as such enforcement is an unconstitutional violation of 
their due process rights. Id. But the cases cited by Plaintiffs to support that proposition are 
inapposite, as they deal with the issue of sovereign immunity as it applies to federal officers—
not state officers. See Muirhead v. Mecham, 427 F.3d 14, 18 (1st Cir. 2005); Larson v. Domestic 
& Foreign Commerce Corp., 337 U.S. 682, 686 (1949). Effectively, a challenge to the 
constitutionality of a state statute as applied by a state official is a contention that the state 
official violated federal law—the law in question being the Constitution of the United States. 
And as discussed, those claims are governed by Ex parte Young, which does not include an 

“ultra vires” exception. Even if this were not the case, Defendants are not acting “without any 
authority whatsoever” by their current failure to return forfeited assets, see Pl.’s Oppo 11 [Doc. 
No. 126] (citing Pennhurst, 465 U.S. at 102 n.11), where those assets were seized pursuant to a 
state statute whose facial constitutionality is not in question.5         


5 Plaintiffs also allege that in some cases, state officials did not lawfully seize the forfeited assets, 
because they did not adhere to the procedures outlined in the State Act. Pl.’s Oppo 11-12 [Doc. 
No. 126]. In particular, several of the named Plaintiffs allegedly did not receive the seven days’ 
notice of forfeiture proceedings required by due process. Am. Compl. ¶¶ 19, 22-23 [Doc. No. 
86]. Plaintiffs appear to assert that those defects rendered the state officials’ actions ultra vires. 
Pl.’s Oppo 11 [Doc. No. 126]. But that a state official’s “conduct is contrary to a state statute” is 
not a basis to find that such conduct is ultra vires: That line of reasoning has been foreclosed by 
the Supreme Court. See Pennhurst, 465 U.S. at 106-107(“[a] federal court’s grant of relief 
against state officials on the basis of state law, whether prospective or retroactive, does not 
      3.   Plaintiffs’ Claims for Prospective, Procedural Injunctive Relief Are Not 
           Barred by Sovereign Immunity                                  
    Where portions of Plaintiffs’ requested relief are classic examples of prospective 
injunctive relief, the Ex parte Young exception to sovereign immunity does apply. Defendants do 
not address these requests for relief head-on, but instead treat them as part of a general category 
of “procedural obligations” that “in practice resemble a money judgment payable out of the state 
treasury.” Commw. Mem. MTD 6 [Doc. No. 110] (quoting Edelman, 415 U.S. at 666). It is true 
that Plaintiffs also request administrative and procedural tools to support the return of their 
forfeited property, Am. Compl. ¶179(b) [Doc. No. 86]. But it mischaracterizes Plaintiffs’ request 
to treat all of their requested remedies as effectively tied to the return of their forfeited assets. 

Rather, Plaintiffs make a specific request for “a full accounting of all Forfeited Property obtained 
from Class Members in connection with their criminal cases.” Id. at ¶ 179(c). Compliance with 
that request would not entail payment from the state treasury, and it bears no resemblance to a 
retroactive award of money damages. Additionally, Plaintiffs request that the court “notify Class 
Members of their rights to the return of all Forfeited Property.” Id. at ¶ 179(a). As discussed, the 
court cannot order, directly or indirectly, the return of forfeited assets. However, to the extent 
Plaintiffs’ request can be read generally to include notification of their rights to a more robust 
state procedure under the State Act, or their rights to pursue relief under Rule 60(b), the court is 
permitted to grant such relief. Indeed, that was the crux of the Supreme Court’s holding in 
Quern, 440 U.S. at 347-48 (“The notice . . . simply apprises plaintiff class members of the 


vindicate the supreme authority of federal law. On the contrary, it is difficult to think of a greater 
intrusion on state sovereignty than when a federal court instructs state officials on how to 
conform their conduct to state law.”). As a result, Plaintiffs have failed to allege that procedural 
violations related to the forfeiture proceedings (Am. Compl. ¶¶ 71-89, 117, 160 [Doc. No. 86]; 
Pl.’s Oppo 11 [Doc. No. 126]) rise to the level of ultra vires actions, such that sovereign 
immunity no longer applies.                                               
existence of whatever administrative procedures may already be available under state law by 
which they may receive a determination of eligibility for past benefits.”). 
    Similarly, if the court were to order additional procedural due process protections within 
a Rule 60(b) hearing, it would not change the fact that “whether or not the class member will 

receive retroactive benefits rests entirely with the State, its agencies, courts, and legislature, not 
with the federal court.” See id. at 348. As a result, the court retains authority to order such relief 
even if these injunctive remedies might have ancillary effects on the state treasury. See Milliken, 
433 U.S. at 289 (“the prospective-compliance exception” to Eleventh Amendment immunity 
“permits federal courts to enjoin state officials to conform their conduct to requirements of 
federal law, notwithstanding a direct and substantial impact on the state treasury”). 
    Because Plaintiffs’ claims include requests for relief other than an order from this court 
directing the payment of money from the state, the court is not barred from entertaining 
Plaintiffs’ constitutional challenges for such other relief.              
   B.  The Statute of Limitations Bars Plaintiffs’ Claims Related to Errors in Their Initial 
      Forfeiture Proceedings.                                            
    All Defendants argue that Plaintiffs’ claims that their initial forfeiture proceedings were 
erroneous as a matter of law are time-barred. Commw. Mem. MTD 20 [Doc. No. 110]; Fall 
River Mem. MTD 3 [Doc. No. 121]; Springfield Mem. MTD 7 [Doc. No. 119]; Boston MTD 1 
[Doc. No. 114]; Brockton Mem. MTD 13 [Doc. No. 116]; Commw. Reply 14 [Doc. No. 127]. 
Plaintiffs respond that their claims relate solely to the unlawful withholding of forfeited property 

that has occurred and continues to occur since their convictions were vacated, and that the statute 
of limitations on those claims did not begin to run until 2017. Pl.’s Oppo 26-29 [Doc. No. 126]. 
The court concludes that claims that the continued withholding of property is unlawful because 
the convictions have been vacated are not time-barred.                    
    To the extent Plaintiffs also seek to challenge the procedures underlying their original 
forfeiture proceedings, however, Defendants are correct that Plaintiffs could have raised those 
challenges at any time after the alleged error occurred. And because the Defendants’ continuing 
alleged violation of federal law (the withholding of their property) does not relate to those initial 

procedural errors, it does not toll the statute of limitations as to those claims. As a result, the 
statute of limitations as to those procedural challenges began to accrue at the time of the 
forfeiture proceedings, not at the time of the SJC’s vacatur of the drug convictions. Those 
challenges are therefore time-barred.                                     
   C.  Younger Abstention Does Not Apply                                 
    All Defendants also contend that Plaintiffs’ claims are barred by Younger abstention. 
Commw. Mem. MTD 8 [Doc. No. 110]; Fall River Mem. MTD 1 [Doc. No. 121]; Springfield 
Mem. MTD 3 [Doc. No. 119]; Brockton Mem. MTD 12 [Doc. No. 116]; Boston MTD 1 [Doc. 
No. 119]. “Younger is a court-made rule of abstention built around the principle that, with 
limited exceptions, federal courts should refrain from issuing injunctions that interfere with 

ongoing state-court litigation, or, in some cases, with state administrative proceedings.” Maymó-
Meléndez v. Álvarez-Ramírez, 364 F.3d 27, 31 (1st Cir. 2004). “[T]he underlying concern is that 
state proceedings, once begun, should be respected by federal courts so long as the federal claims 
or defenses can be litigated in the course of those proceedings.” Id. at 32. Importantly, “whether 
federal courts should be able to interfere with ongoing state proceedings is quite distinct and 
separate from the issue of whether [federal] litigants are entitled to subsequent federal review of 
state-court dispositions of federal questions.” Huffman v. Pursue, Ltd., 420 U.S. 592, 606 (1975). 
Defendants argue that Plaintiffs are engaged in an “ongoing” civil proceeding, because there is 
still some existing state appellate process that could resolve Plaintiffs’ claims. See Commw. 
Mem. MTD 8-9 [Doc. No. 110]. The court disagrees.                         
    First, the court declines to adopt Defendants’ argument that a Rule 60(b) procedure 
constitutes an unexhausted state appellate remedy such that Plaintiffs’ state forfeiture 

proceedings should be considered “ongoing.” Defendants are incorrect that a Rule 60(b) motion 
is a direct appellate remedy, as contemplated by Huffman, 420 U.S. at 610, rather than a 
collateral remedy: The Rule itself expressly states that a motion pursuant to Rule 60(b) “does not 
affect [a] judgment’s finality or suspend its operation.” Defendants’ reliance on Sirva Relocation, 
LLC v. Richie, 794 F.3d 185 (1st Cir. 2015), see Commw. Mem. MTD 8-9 [Doc. No. 110], to 
support their assertion is also misplaced. In that case, the state had “conducted a pre-hearing 
conference, and scheduled an adjudicative hearing” that had not yet transpired before the 
plaintiffs sued in federal court— actions the First Circuit held “conclusively show[ed] the 
existence of an ongoing state proceeding that is judicial in nature.” Sirva, 794 F.3d at 196. 
Nothing of the sort has occurred here. The state has not begun any procedures related to a Rule 

60 hearing, because the Plaintiffs have not initiated that collateral action. Therefore, there are no 
ongoing state proceedings into which this court could intervene.          
   Second, while it is true that Younger abstention bars federal challenges to civil forfeiture 
proceedings “before the forfeiture hearing in state court” has occurred, see Loch v. Watkins, 337 
F.3d 574, 577 (6th Cir. 2003), or where those proceedings “were pending in state court at the 
time” the federal action was initiated, see Postscript Enterprises, Inc. v. Peach, 878 F.2d 1114, 
1116 (8th Cir. 1989), that is not the situation here. The civil forfeiture proceedings in which 
these Plaintiffs had their assets seized have long since concluded in state court. See Am. Compl. 
¶¶ 18-22 [Doc. No. 86] (describing named Plaintiffs’ forfeiture proceedings); Pl.’s Oppo 14 
[Doc. No. 126].                                                           
   D.  The Rooker-Feldman Doctrine Does Not Apply                        
   Under the Rooker-Feldman doctrine, “lower federal courts are precluded from exercising 

appellate jurisdiction over final state-court judgments.” Lance v. Dennis, 546 U.S. 459, 463 
(2006). The doctrine exists to prevent “cases brought by state-court losers complaining of 
injuries caused by state-court judgments rendered before the district court proceedings 
commenced and inviting district court review and rejection of those judgments.” Exxon Mobil 
Corp. v. Saudi Basic Indus. Corp., 544 U.S. 280, 284 (2005).              
    Defendants contend that Rooker-Feldman applies here, “because [Plaintiffs] seek to have 
this Court review and overturn thousands of state court judgments.” Commw. Mem. MTD 11 
[Doc. No. 110]; see Brockton Mem. MTD 12 [Doc. No. 116]; Fall River Mem. MTD 1 [Doc. 
No. 121]; Springfield Mem. MTD 4-5 [Doc. No. 119]; Boston MTD 1 [Doc. No. 114]. But, as 
discussed above, Plaintiffs are not seeking this court’s direct review of their state court forfeiture 

proceedings; even if they were, the statute of limitations would bar those claims. Rather, 
Plaintiffs are challenging the inadequate constitutional protections afforded after those 
proceedings have concluded, where criminal defendants like Plaintiffs have been deemed legally 
innocent but must nevertheless shoulder a burden of proof in order to return to their pre-
conviction status quo. That challenge does not implicate the validity of any original forfeiture 
proceeding, nor does it require this court to undertake a substantive review of the state court’s 
determination on the issue. See Skinner v. Switzer, 562 U.S. 521, 532 (2011) (“If a federal 
plaintiff present[s] [an] independent claim, it is not an impediment to the exercise of federal 
jurisdiction that the same or a related question was earlier aired between the parties in state 
court.”) (alterations in original) (internal citations omitted).          
    Defendants also argue that Plaintiffs are seeking this court’s review of the SJC’s decision 
in Martinez. Commw. Mem. MTD 12 [Doc. No. 110]. Critically, and fatally to Defendants’ 

position, Plaintiffs were not parties to Martinez, and so they are not “aggrieved litigant[s]” 
seeking this court’s review of a judgment entered against them in state court. See Tyler v. Sup. 
Jud. Ct. of Mass., 914 F.3d 47, 50 (1st Cir. 2019); accord Johnson v. DeGrandy, 512 U.S. 997, 
1006 (1994) (plaintiff “was not a party in the state court” and therefore was “in no position to ask 
[for] review [of] the state court’s judgment”).6 What is more, some of Plaintiffs’ constitutional 
challenges were not before the Martinez court, and so there is no state-court judgment that could 
possibly bar this court’s review on those claims. And even where Plaintiffs’ constitutional 
challenges overlap with those brought in Martinez, this court is not bound by the SJC’s 
conclusions on matters of federal law. As a result, Rooker-Feldman does not apply to Plaintiffs’ 
constitutional challenges where they do not seek direct review of a state-court judgment. 

   E.  The Colorado River Doctrine Does Not Apply                        
    Like the Rooker-Feldman doctrine, application of the Colorado River doctrine may 
warrant “dismissal of a federal suit due to the presence of a concurrent state proceeding.” Colo. 
River Water Conservation Dist. v. United States, 424 U.S. 800, 818 (1976) (emphasis added). 
But, as discussed, there is no concurrent state proceeding at issue here. As a result, the doctrine 
does not apply, and the court need not engage in the factor-balancing test the Defendants urge. 
See Commw. Mem. MTD 13-14 [Doc No. 110].                                  


6 For this reason, Brockton’s argument that res judicata bars Plaintiffs’ suit also fails. Brockton 
Mem. MTD. 16 [Doc. No. 116]. Plaintiffs have not yet had their opportunity to litigate any of 
these issues before any court.                                            
   F.  Liability of the Municipal Police Defendants                      
   Police Departments, as municipal entities, “can be sued directly under § 1983 for 
monetary, declaratory, or injunctive relief where . . . the action that is alleged to be 
unconstitutional implements or executes a policy statement, ordinance, regulation, or decision 

officially adopted and promulgated by that body’s officers.” Monell v. Dep’t of Social Servs. of 
City of N.Y., 436 U.S. 658, 690 (1978). Additionally, municipalities may be sued for 
“deprivations visited pursuant to governmental ‘custom’ even though such a custom has not 
received formal approval through the body’s official decisionmaking channels.” Id. at 691. 
   The City of Brockton argues that Plaintiffs have failed to allege a Monell violation 
because the Police Departments are not responsible for enforcing or interpreting the State Act. 
Brockton Mem. MTD 11 [Doc. No. 116]; see Springfield Mem. MTD 9 [Doc. No. 119] (arguing 
the same, but in the context of whether the Police Department is a proper class representative). In 
response, Plaintiffs do not contend that the Police Departments are responsible for interpreting, 
enforcing, or defending the State Act: rather, they argue that whether the Police Departments 

were merely “following orders” is irrelevant to whether they are ultimately liable for the return 
of forfeited property. Pl’s Oppo 42 [Doc. No. 126].7                      
   The circuits are split on whether a municipal entity can be liable under Section 1983 for 
complying with the edicts of state law. Compare, e.g. Bethesda Lutheran Homes and Servs., Inc. 
v. Leean, 154 F.3d 716, 718 (7th Cir. 1998) with Evers v. Cty. of Custer, 745 F.2d 1196, 1203 
(9th Cir. 1984). The First Circuit has not yet spoken to the issue. Other sessions in this district 
have adopted the test laid out by the Second Circuit, see Martin v. Evans, 241 F. Supp. 3d 276, 


7 To the extent Plaintiffs’ claims against the Police Department Defendants begin and end with a 
claim for the return of forfeited assets, Plaintiffs concede that claim should be treated as one and 
the same as their claim seeking that relief against the Commonwealth.     
284-85 (D. Mass. 2017), and this court likewise applies the Second Circuit’s test here. Under that 
test, the liability inquiry turns on “(1) whether the City had a meaningful choice as to whether it 
would enforce [the statute in question]; and (2) if so, whether the City adopted a discrete policy 
to enforce [the statute in question] that represented a conscious choice by a municipal 

policymaker.” Vives v. City of N.Y., 524 F.3d 346, 353 (2d Cir. 2008). Here, Plaintiffs have not 
put forth any allegations about the Police Departments’ “meaningful choice” under M.G.L. ch. 
94C § 47. The language of the State Act indicates that the Departments do not enjoy such 
discretion:                                                               
    All  such  moneys  and  proceeds  received  by  any  police  department  shall  be 
    deposited in a special law enforcement trust fund and shall be expended without 
    further appropriation to defray the costs of protracted investigations, to provide 
    additional technical equipment or expertise, to provide matching funds to obtain 
    federal grants, or to accomplish such other law enforcement purposes as the chief 
    of police of such city or town, or the colonel of state police deems appropriate, but 
    such funds shall not be considered a source of revenue to meet the operating needs 
    of such department.                                                  
M.G.L. ch. 94C § 47(d) (emphases added).                                 
   That mandatory statutory language forecloses a Monell claim against the Police 
Departments regarding the return of the Plaintiffs’ civilly forfeited assets. As such, the Plaintiffs 
have failed to state a claim for relief against the Police Department Defendants. 
 IV.  Conclusion                                                         
    For the foregoing reasons, the Commonwealth Defendants’ Motion to Dismiss [Doc No. 
109] is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part and the remaining Defendants’ Motions to 
Dismiss [Doc. Nos. 114, 115, 118, 120] are GRANTED.                       
    IT IS SO ORDERED                                                     
November 13, 2023                       /s/  Indira Talwani               
                                       United States District Judge