US Gisip i?  □□□□□ 
                                                              DISTRICT CF  VERMONT 
                     UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
                                  FOR THE                   2821 NOY  19  PM  5:08 
                          DISTRICT OF VERMONT                  CLERK 
COURTHOUSE NEWS SERVICE:                         )
VERMONT PRESS ASSOCIATION, INC.;    _)                           
NEW ENGLAND FIRST AMENDMENT                       ) 
COALITION; GRAY MEDIA GROUP, INC.) 
d/b/a WCAX-TV; GANNETT VERMONT                   ) 
PUBLISHING, INC. d/b/a Burlington Free            ) 
Press; SAMPLE NEWS GROUP, LLC d/b/a   _) 
Barre-Montpelier Times Argus and Rutland    __) 
Herald; VTDigger, a project of the                ) 
VERMONT JOURNALISM TRUST, LTD.;  _                ) 
VERMONT COMMUNITY NEWSPAPER _                     ) 
GROUP, LLC d/b/a Stowe Reporter,                  ) 
News & Citizen, South Burlington Other            ) 
Paper, Shelburne News, and The Citizen; and _     ) 
DA CAPO PUBLISHING, INC.                          ) 
d/b/a Seven Days,                                ) 
                                                 ) 
            Plaintiffs,                          ) 
                                                 ) 
     Vv.                                         )      Case No. 2:21-cv-000132 
                                                 ) 
PATRICIA GABEL, in her official capacity as  _) 
the State Court Administrator of the Supreme   _) 
Court of the State of Vermont; AMANDA            ) 
STITES, in her official capacity as Clerk of     _) 
Court for Addison, Bennington, and Rutland    __) 
Counties, MARGARET VILLENEUVE, in her            ) 
official capacity as Clerk of Court for          ) 
Caledonia, Essex, Orleans, and Washington        ) 
Counties; CHRISTINE BROCK, in her official       ) 
capacity as Clerk of Court for Chittenden        ) 
County; GAYE PAQUETTE, in her official           ) 
capacity as Clerk of Court for Franklin, Grand) 
Isle, and Lamoille Counties; and ANNE            ) 
DAMONE, in her official capacity as Clerk of     ) 
Court for Orange, Windham, and Windsor           ) 
Counties,                                        ) 
                                                 ) 
            Defendants.                          ) 

  OPINION AND ORDER DENYING AS MOOT PLAINTIFFS’ MOTION FOR 
   PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION, DENYING DEFENDANTS’ MOTION TO 
   DISMISS, GRANTING IN PART AND DENYING IN PART PLAINTIFFS’ 
         REQUEST FOR PERMANENT INJUNCTIVE RELIEF, AND 
     DENYING PLAINTIFFS’ REQUEST FOR DECLARATORY RELIEF 
                              (Docs. 16, 26, & 43) 
     Plaintiffs Courthouse News Service; Vermont Press Association, Inc.; New 
England First Amendment Coalition; Gray Media Group, Inc. d/b/a WCAX-TV; Gannett 
Vermont Publishing, Inc. d/b/a Burlington Free Press; Sample News Group, LLC d/b/a 
Barre-Montpelier Times Argus and Rutland Herald; VTDigger, a project of the Vermont 
Journalism Trust, Ltd.; Vermont Community Newspaper Group, LLC d/b/a Stowe 
Reporter, News & Citizen, South Burlington Other Paper, Shelburne News, and The 
Citizen; and Da Capo Publishing, Inc. d/b/a Seven Days (collectively, “Plaintiffs”) bring 
this action under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 against Defendants Patricia Gabel, in her official 
capacity as State Court Administrator of the Supreme Court of the State of Vermont; 
Amanda Stites, in her official capacity as Clerk of Court for Addison, Bennington, and 
Rutland Counties; Margaret Villeneuve, in her official capacity as Clerk of Court for 
Caledonia, Essex, Orleans, and Washington Counties; Christine Brock, in her official 
capacity as Clerk of Court for Chittenden County; Gaye Paquette, in her official capacity 
as Clerk of Court for Franklin, Grand Isle, and Lamoille Counties; and Anne Damone, in 
her official capacity as Clerk of Court for Orange, Windham, and Windsor Counties 
(collectively, “Defendants”). 
      Plaintiffs allege that Defendants’ failure to make newly filed civil complaints 
available to the public prior to Defendants’ pre-access review process violates Plaintiffs’ 
First Amendment rights. Plaintiffs seek injunctive and declaratory relief and an award of 
attorneys’ fees under 42 U.S.C. § 1988. 
I.     Procedural Background. 
      Plaintiffs filed  a complaint for injunctive and declaratory relief on May 20, 2021 
and amended it on June 7, 2021. (Docs. 1 & 16.) The parties filed a Stipulation and 
Proposed Order regarding a briefing schedule for a motion for preliminary injunction by 

Plaintiffs and a motion to dismiss by Defendants, which the court adopted on July 8, 
2021. (Doc. 25.) Plaintiffs moved for a preliminary injunction on July 12, 2021, seeking 
to enjoin Defendants from denying Plaintiffs access to newly filed civil complaints until 
after they were processed pursuant to the rules promulgated by the Vermont Supreme 
Court. (Doc. 26.) On August 18, 2021, Defendants filed a motion to dismiss (Doc. 43) 
and opposed Plaintiffs’ motion for a preliminary injunction (Doc. 44). On September 24, 
2021, Plaintiffs filed a reply in support of their motion for a preliminary injunction (Doc. 
50) and a response in opposition to Defendants’ motion to dismiss (Doc. 51). Defendants 
replied in support of their motion to dismiss on October 15, 2021. (Doc. 52.) 
     Pursuant to F ederal Rule of Civil Procedure 65(a)(2), with the parties’ consent, the 
court consolidated the hearing on the preliminary injunction with a  trial on the merits. 
The consolidated hearing and trial were held on October 25, 2021. The parties stipulated 
to a trial without live witnesses, asking the court to make its factual findings based on the 
materials they submitted. Because there has been a  trial on the merits, Plaintiffs’ motion 
for preliminary injunction (Doc. 26) is DENIED AS MOOT. 
     On October 29, 2021, Defendants moved for leave to file  a supplemental 
submission, which Plaintiffs opposed as inconsistent with the parties’ stipulation.' The 
court granted leave in part “to the extent Defendants present new evidence regarding 
when newly filed complaints that are not made publicly available on the date of filing 
become accessible[,]”’ and denied it in part “to the extent it presents new arguments based 
on case law which predates the trial.” (Doc. 60.) Plaintiffs responded to Defendants’ 
supplemental submission on November 5, 2021, at which point the court took the 
pending motions under advisement. (Doc. 61.) 
     Plaintiffs are represented by William Hibsher, Esq., Jonathan E. Ginsberg, Esq., 
and Robert B. Hemley, Esq. Defendants are represented by Assistant Attorney General 
David Boyd. 

! “(T]he parties’ agreement to consolidate without live witnesses means the Court can reach the 
factual findings it thinks [are] appropriate based on the record before it[.]” (Doc. 57 at 55.) 

II.    Findings of Fact. 
     Pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 52(a)(1) and the parties’ stipulation, 
the court makes the following findings of facts. 
     A.     The Parties. 
   1.  With the exception of New England First Amendment Coalition, a regional group 
     interested in protecting First Amendment freedoms, Plaintiffs are media 
     companies that report on court proceedings in the Vermont Superior Courts and 
     elsewhere. 
  2.  Plaintiff Courthouse News Service (“CNS”) is a nationwide news service which 
     employs approximately 240 people, most of them editors and reporters, covering 
     state and federal trial and appellate courts in all fifty states in the United States. It 
     currently employs reporters who cover the state and federal trial and appellate 
     courts of Vermont. 
  3.  Plaintiff CNS offers a variety of publications, including its “New Litigation 
     Reports,” which contain original, staff-written summaries of significant new civil 
     complaints. New Litigation Reports focus on general jurisdiction civil complaints 
     against business institutions, public entities, prominent individuals, or other civil 
     actions of interest to CNS subscribers. New Litigation Reports do not cover 
      criminal or family law matters, nor do they include residential foreclosures or 
     probate filings. 
   4.  Among Plaintiff CNS’s other publications are its two print newsletters and an 
      electronic “Daily Brief” which cover published nationwide appellate rulings, 
      including all U.S. Supreme Court and federal circuit decisions, as well as 
      significant rulings from federal district courts, including the District of Vermont. 
      In addition, Plaintiff CNS publishes a website featuring news reports and 
      commentary, which functions much like a daily newspaper. 
   5.  To prepare New Litigation Reports and identify new cases that may warrant 
      coverage, Plaintiff CNS’s reporters have traditionally visited their assigned courts 
      to review all newly filed complaints in order to determine which ones are 

    newsworthy. However, as the federal courts and an increasing number of state 
    courts are making court records available online, and in light of the ongoing 
    COVID-19 pandemic, Plaintiff CNS also covers courts remotely through the 
    Internet. 
 6.  Reporters for the other media Plaintiffs also review newly filed civil complaints to 
    identify cases that may be newsworthy. Any delay in the ability of a reporter to 
    obtain and review a newly filed complaint necessarily creates a delay in the ability 
    to inform subscribers and the public of the factual and legal allegations in those 
    complaints. 
 7.  Defendants are state officials responsible for the administration of the Vermont 
    Superior Courts. The Vermont Superior Courts are comprised of fourteen county- 
    based units.” 
 8.  Vermont Superior Courts are the trial courts that hear the majority of civil actions. 
 9.  Vermont Superior Court Clerks are responsible for, among other things, the 
    administration of civil court records and the provision of public access to those 
    records. 
    B.     Transition to Odyssey Electronic Filings. 
  10.From April 20, 2017 to March 2020, Plaintiffs were able to review newly filed 
    paper complaints, including, in some cases, complaints that had yet to be docketed 
    in the Vermont Superior Courts. Before providing complaints to the press or the 
    public, court staff would complete a “quick file audit” to confirm the absence of 
    confidential information or remove previously identified confidential information. 
    (Doc. 50-3 at 3.) 
  11.In March 2020, the Vermont Judiciary implemented a new electronic case 
    management system “Odyssey,” which is hosted by a  third-party vendor, Tyler 
    Technologies, Inc. 

Addison, Bennington, Caledonia, Chittenden, Essex, Franklin, Grand Isle, Lamoille, Orange, 
Orleans, Rutland, Washington, Windham, and Windsor. 

12. The Vermont Superior Courts transitioned to Odyssey’s electronic filing system in 
  three phases. The Orange, Windham, and Windsor units began the transition to 
  electronic records in March 2020 and began accepting electronic filings in April 
  2020. The Addison, Bennington, Chittenden, and Rutland units began the 
  transition to electronic records in September 2020 and began accepting electronic 
  filings in October 2020. The Caledonia, Essex, Franklin, Grand Isle, Lamoille, 
  Orleans, and Washington units began the transition to electronic records in 
  February 2021 and began accepting electronic filings on March 15, 2021. 
13. As of March 15, 2021, with limited exceptions, all documents filed in the Vermont 
  Superior Courts are required to be electronically filed. See 2020 Vermont Rules 
  for Electronic Filing Rule 3(a). 
14. Public access to filings is available only at designated display terminals located in 
  courthouses and judiciary offices during regular business hours. Each unit must 
  have at least one public access terminal. Remote access to publicly accessible case 
  records, except for criminal, family, or probate records, may be provided at the 
  discretion of the Court Administrator. 
15. During the rollout of Odyssey, the Vermont Superior Courts experienced COVID- 
   19-related challenges including work restrictions, equipment shortages, training 
  delays, and the reallocation of information technology professionals to tasks 
  related to remote connectivity rather than electronic filing. 
16. The Vermont Superior Courts continue to suffer a high employee attrition rate and 
  continue to experience difficulties in recruiting necessary staff to assist in 
  Odyssey’s implementation as well as other court-related tasks. 
  C.     The Rules Authorizing the Pre-Access Review Process. 
17. The 2020 Vermont Rules for Electronic Filing (“V.R.E.F.”) and Vermont Rules 
  for Public Access to Court Records (“V.R.P.A.C.R.”) control the process for 
  electronic filing in the Vermont Superior Courts. 
18. Under V.R.E.F. 5(b), the electronic filer must: 

 (1)    prepare and format the efiling in accordance with Rule 5(f) and (g), 
        and Rule 7; 
  (2)    sign the efiling as provided in Rule 9; 
  (3)    provide a mailing address and email address on the documents 
        electronically filed; 
  (4)    satisfy payment requirements of Rule 10; 
  (5)    take any actions required under Rule 7(a)(1) of V.R.P.A.C.R.; 
  (6)    certify that each document filed complies with V.R.P.A.C.R.; and 
  (7)    for initial filings, provide service contacts that will enable post- 
        commencement service on the efiler and maintain updated contacts. 
19. Under V.R.E.F. 5(d), Vermont Superior Court staff are required to perform 
 the following processing: 
  (1)    Court Staff Review. Court staff will review all electronic filings for 
        compliance with these rules and Rule 7(a)(1) of V.R.P.A.C.R. 
  (2)    Accepting or Rejecting a Filing. Court staff will electronically notify 
        the efiler either that the efiling has been accepted or that it cannot be 
        accepted until specified actions required under these rules have been 
        taken. 
  (3)    Correcting an eFiling. An efiler may submit a corrected efiling 
        within seven days after receiving the notification if the efiler follows 
        the instructions for efiling a correction on the electronic filing 
        system. The court may extend the time for correction for good cause. 
        Court staff will accept a corrected efiling if all requirements of those 
        rules and the instructions for correction have been met. 
  (4)    Filing Date. When an efiling has been accepted, the date and time of 
        efiling for all purposes under the applicable rules of procedure are 
        the date and time that the initial efiling was submitted if the 
        corrected filing complied with the time limits in (d)(3). 
  (5)    Assigning Case Number. The electronic filing system will provide a 
        case number for a new case filing that has been accepted in the 
        acceptance notification. The assigned case number must appear on 
        all subsequent efilings pertaining to the case. 
20. Under V.R.P.A.C.R. 6(b), the public “does not have access” to certain court 
  records, including the following: 
  (1)    Records which by statute, court rule, or other source of law are 
        designated confidential or to which access is prohibited by a similar 

        term. An appendix to this rule lists all statutes and court rules 
        containing a prohibition or restriction on public access, existing on 
        the date of promulgation of this rule, and a summary of the extent 
        and terms of the prohibition or restriction. Annually before January 1 
        of each year the Court Administrator will update the list in the 
        appendix. 

  (14)   The following personally identifying data elements filed in a case 
        record that is otherwise publicly accessible under these rules: 
        (i)     A social security number; 
        (ii)  | A passport number; 
        (iii)   A taxpayer identification number; 
        (iv)   A financial account number, including a credit or debit card 
              number; or 
        (v)     Inacriminal case, the name of a child alleged to be a victim. 
              In lieu of a social security, passport, taxpayer identification or 
              financial account number, the filer may include the last four 
              digits of that number. In lieu of the name of a child victim, 
              the filer may include the initials of the first and last name of 
              the child.                                                    □ 
21.  Although  none of the Vermont Judiciary’s electronic filing rules clearly state that 
  the public shall not have access to a newly filed complaint until a pre-access 
  review process is completed, Defendants contend that the rules, when read 
  collectively, authorize a process which entitles the Vermont Superior Courts to 
  withhold access to newly filed complaints until  a manual review for certain 
  information takes place. The rules impose no deadlines or other temporal restraints 
  on how long the pre-access review process may take, how it is staffed, or impose 
  any consequences if the pre-access review process is unduly delayed. 
22. Plaintiffs contend that as of July 1, 2021, Vermont was the only state in the nation 
  that requires court clerks to independently review electronic court filings in a non- 
  public queue for confidential information before those filings are accessible to the 
  public. Defendants offered no evidence to rebut that contention. 

  D.     Protection of Confidential Records and Consequences of 
        Noncompliance. 
23. V.R.P.A.C.R. 2(e) states: “To the extent reasonably practicable, restriction of 
  access to confidential information is implemented in a manner that does not 
  restrict access to any portion of the record that is not confidential.” 
24. V.R.P.A.C.R. 7(a)(1) imposes the following responsibilities on filers: 
  (A)    In General. It is the responsibility of the filer of a case record, 
        whether in physical or electronic form, to determine whether all or 
        part of the record being filed is not publicly accessible. 
  (B)    Certifying Compliance. The filer must certify that the filer has 
        reviewed the case record, and that the filing specifies the nonpublic 
        records and protects those records from disclosure to the public 
        consistent with these rules. The certificate must detail any actions 
        taken to comply with these rules and the reasons for the actions. 
  (C)    Separating Nonpublic Records in Public Files. If the record is not 
        filed in a type of case that is closed to the public by statute, the filer 
        must separate the part of the record that is subject to public access 
        from the part that is not subject to public access by redaction or other 
        similar method. The filer may separately file the omitted or redacted 
        part of the record or may additionally file a separate complete 
        record. 
  (D)    Identifying Nonpublic Records. The filer of a record that is not 
        publicly accessible under these rules or under statute must identify 
        the record as not publicly accessible at the time of filing. After 
        acceptance of the filing, court staff will place that document, or any 
        other document not publicly accessible, in the section of the 
        electronic or physical file of the case that is not publicly accessible. 
25. V.R.P.A.C.R. 7(a)(3) and (4) set forth the following court staff responsibilities and 
  powers: 
  (3)    Responsibility of Court Staff When Document is Filed. The Court 
        Administrator will establish the procedures for staff to discharge the 
        record custodian's responsibility to provide public and special access 
        to records as provided in these rules and to implement exceptions to 
        public access established by these rules and by statute. If staff 
        determine that a filing does not fully comply with these rules, 
        including with respect to one or more personal identifiers, staff must 
        take an action specified in paragraph (4). If a court staff person or 
        judicial officer discovers that a case record that is publicly accessible 

       may be in that status in violation of these rules, the staff or officer 
       must act to temporarily restrict public access to the record and notify 
       the Court Administrator. If the Court Administrator determines that 
       public access to the record is not authorized under these rules, the 
       Court Administrator will direct that the record be removed from 
       public access. The Court Administrator may direct that the record be 
       redacted or otherwise modified to allow public access to parts that 
       are publicly accessible under these rules. If the record was filed by 
       or on behalf of a party or another person who is not court staff or a 
       judicial officer, the Court Administrator may direct that the filer 
       make the record compliant with these rules within a specified time. 
       If the filer provides a compliant filing on or before the specified time 
       limit, the filing date will be the date of the original filing. Otherwise, 
       the filing date will be the date of the compliant filing. The Court 
       Administrator may appoint a designee to discharge the Court 
       Administrator’s responsibility under this rule. 
 (4)    Actions When a  Filing is Noncompliant with Rules. 
       (A)    The staff person who reviews the filing may: 
             (i)     Change the public-access status or redact the filing to 
                   comply with these rules; or 
             (ii)  | Reject the filing until it is made compliant with these 
                   rules and specify the time limit to do so. 
       (B)    In addition, the staff person may refer the matter to an 
             assigned judge who, after notice and hearing, may: 
             (i)     Impose any sanction authorized by V.R.C.P. 11(c), 
                   regardless of whether that rule is otherwise applicable 
                   to the proceeding involved; 
              (ii)  | Reference the matter to the Professional Responsibility 
                   Program if the court finds that there is probable cause 
                   to conclude that a lawyer has violated Rule 3.4(c) of 
                   the Rules of Professional Conduct; and/or 
              (iii)   Ifthe court finds a violation of these rules occurred 
                    and excusable neglect is not present, order that the date 
                    of the corrected filing is the date of filing for all 
                    purposes; or remedial action appropriate to the 
                    circumstances. 
26. “For case records, the rules recognize that it is the responsibility of both filers of 
  case records and the Judiciary to protect confidentiality and privacy where public 

  access is restricted by such requirements.” V.R.P.A.C.R. 3(b). The Judiciary is 
  required to “take reasonable steps to comply with these rules.” Jd. A non- 
  compliant filer is subject to penalties set forth in V.R.P.A.C.R. 7(a)(4), including 
  sanctions and referral to the bar for violation of the Rules of Professional Conduct. 
27.From the transition to electronic filing through September 3, 2021, the Vermont 
  Superior Courts rejected sixty-six proposed filings across all filing types under 
  rejection code RR1 1—Public Documents Containing Nonpublic Information and 
  seventy-two additional proposed filings across all filing types with comments 
  indicating rejection was related to nonpublic information. Nineteen of those were 
  civil filings and four were listed as confidential by the filer in the Filing Code 
  Description. Of those four, one was an unredacted check and three were exhibits 
  to two civil complaints. (Doc. 50-3 at 4-5.) 
28. Defendants’ pre-access review for confidential information has thus led to a 
  rejection of three exhibits related to two out of 4,156 newly filed civil complaints 
   during Odyssey’s implementation. This means that the pre-access review process 
   for confidential information identified a violation in only 0.048% of newly filed 
   complaints. 
   E.     Delays Occasioned by the Pre-Access Review Process. 
29. After they are electronically filed in the Vermont Superior Courts, newly filed 
   complaints are placed in an electronic review queue which is not accessible to the 
   public. A clerk checks for a signature, unredacted personally identifying 
   information exempt from disclosure, and comments left by the filer. The clerk 
   verifies that the complaint is correctly designated as public, confidential, or sealed; 
   that the right filing codes are selected; and that the filing fee and case type selected 
   are correct. The clerk then accepts or rejects the filing. Accepted nonconfidential 
   filings become available for public viewing only after this review process is 
   complete. 
30. The pre-access review process for new civil filings typically takes approximately 
   twenty minutes to complete. Odyssey’s software performs a  verification process 

  that duplicates the clerk’s pre-access review except for the review for confidential 
  information, which must be undertaken manually. 
31. Because Defendants provide no evidence that their ministerial review of a newly 
  filed complaint (for signature, fee payment, coding, etc.) takes twenty minutes, nor 
 would it be reasonable to make such a  claim, it appears that the majority of the 
 pre-access review process is devoted to a manual review of the complaint for 
 confidential information. This is also the only portion of the pre-access review 
 process which is not duplicated by Odyssey’s software. 
32.If a  filing is accepted, it becomes available electronically for public viewing upon 
  acceptance. 
33. But for the Vermont Superior Courts’ pre-access review process, newly filed 
 complaints could be made accessible to the public immediately upon filing. 
34. Since the implementation of Odyssey, delays in access to newly filed complaints 
 have been pervasive throughout the Vermont Superior Courts. Of the 4,156 newly 
  filed civil complaints filed in the fourteen Vermont Superior Courts from the first 
  implementation of Odyssey until August 6, 2021 (the “Designated Period”), on 
  average: 
     a.  54.8% were made available to the public on the same day as filing; 
     b.  22.6% were made available to the public one day after filing; 
     c.  4.6% were made available to the public two days after filing; 
     d.  6.7% were made available to the public three days after filing; and 
     e.  11.4% were made available to the public four or more days after filing. 
35.On a weekly basis, the percentage of newly filed civil complaints made available 
  on the same day as filing ranged, on average, from a low of 0% for weeks starting 
  May 3, 2020; May  17, 2020; and October 4, 2020, to a high of 91.7% for the week 
  starting November 22, 2020. 
36. Among the fourteen Vermont Superior Courts during the Designated Period, the 
  percentage of newly filed civil complaints made available on the same day as 
  filing ranged from a low of 3.8% to a high of 81.6%. Specifically: 

a.  In the Addison Unit, 33.9% were made available to the public on the same 
  day as filing; 
b.  In the Bennington Unit, 51.0% were made available to the public on the 
  same day as filing; 
c.  In the Caledonia Unit, 11.1% were made available to the public on the 
  same day as filing; 
d.  In the Chittenden Unit, 61.1% were made available to the public on the 
  same day as filing; 
e.  In the Essex Unit, 3.8% were made available to the public on the same day 
  as filing; 
f.  In the Franklin Unit, 58.2% were made available to the public on the same 
  day as filing; 
g.  Inthe Grand Isle Unit, 53.1% were made available to the public on the 
  same day as filing; 
h.  In the Lamoille Unit, 50.7% were made available to the public on the same 
  day as filing; 
i.   Inthe Orange Unit, 39.5% were made available to the public on the same 
  day as filing; 
j.   Inthe Orleans Unit, 28.0% were made available to the public on the same 
  day as filing; 
k.  Inthe Rutland Unit, 64.9% were made available to the public on the same 
   day as filing; 
1.   In the Washington Unit, 67.6% were made available to the public on the 
   same day as filing; 
m. In the Windham Unit, 81.6% were made available to the public on the same 
   day as filing; and 
n.  In the Windsor Unit, 37.8% were made available to the public on the same 
   day as filing. 

37. The Vermont Superior Courts’ pre-access review process results in delay that 
  varies significantly between court units and within each court unit: 
          Availability  for Each of the 14 Vermont   Superior Court  Units   - In Calendar  Day 

          Addison Unit       7%         26%         %           35 
          Caledonia Unit                  10%         a           30 
          Chittenden Unit      16%         1%         ™           167 
           Essex Unit        0%         50%         O%
          Frankbs: Unit       Ow        20%         %
          Geand Isle Unit      50%        2%         2%
           amoille  Unit       58%         1%         2%          48 
          Orange Unit       aX         26%         H%           27 
           Orleans Unit       T&         21%                      29 
           Rutland  Unit       6%         28%         6           90 
           Washington Unit     %                    19%          104 
           Windham   Unit      71%         %e         20%          70 

              ability  for Each of the 14 Vermont  Superior     Court Units - In Work Day 

          Addison Unit       83%         1%         0%           3s 
          Bennington Unit     50%         35%         15%
          Caledonia Unt      90%         10%         0%           » 
          Chittenden Unit      84%         4%         1%           167 
           Essex Unit        79%         25%         o%
          Franklin Unit       T&         26%         Oo           & 
           Gaand Isle Unit      6%         3%         O%
           Lamoille Unit       83%         We         om           48 
           Orange Unit       8i%         LBS         a”           27 
           Orleans Unit       9%         2%         0%           » 
          Ruthnd Unit       7%         28%         ™%
           Washington Unit     58%         31%         1%          104 
           Windham Unit      76%         10%         14%
           W mdsor  Unr       61%        30%         9%

   F.     The Centralization Process. 
38. The Vermont Superior Courts are in the process of centralizing the pre-access 
   review process on a division-by-division basis as part of a pilot approach that will 
   be evaluated and adjusted as necessary before becoming permanent. Centralized 
   review for five Vermont Superior Court units began in July of 2021 but staffing 
   constraints have not allowed for the other units to be centralized. Defendants’ goal 
   is to have the civil pilot program cover the remaining units in October of 2021 and 
   make it permanent by the end of 2021. (Docs. 44-14 and 55.) 

    G.    Whether Media Coverage has been Impaired by Defendants’ Pre- 
          access Review Process and Whether Plaintiffs are Entitled to Special 
          Access. 
 39. Defendants argue that Plaintiffs fail to prove that their ability to provide timely 
    coverage of court cases has been impaired by Defendants’ pre-access review 
    process. They ask the court to use Plaintiff CNS’s publication dates to determine 
    whether there has been unconstitutional delay. Not only does this approach reflect 
    a misallocation of the burden of proof, Defendants’ evidence in support of this 
    argument is unreliable. Many factors contribute to when Plaintiff CNS provides 
    media coverage of a newly filed complaint. To measure delay by publication dates 
    thus fails to yield an accurate determination of when a newly filed complaint 
    becomes accessible to the public. 
 40. Plaintiffs’ suggestion that Defendants create  a media queue that affords the media 
    preferential access is equally misplaced. Although Plaintiffs point to states which 
    use the same technology as Odyssey that have chosen to implement a media 
    queue,’ Plaintiffs’ First Amendment right of access does not exceed that of the 
    general public.  A media queue would thus not provide an adequate remedy for any 
    unconstitutional delay. See Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc., 
    472 U.S. 749, 773-74 (1985) (White, J., concurring) (observing that the First 
    Amendment does not guarantee the press a constitutional right and special access 
    to information not available to the public generally); Courthouse News Serv. v. 
     Schaefer, 2 F.4th 318, 326 n.5 (4th Cir. 2021) (“The media’s rights of access are 
     co-extensive with and do not exceed those rights of members of the public in 
     general.”) (internal quotation marks omitted). 

     California, Georgia, and Nevada, for example, courts which use the same electronic filing 
and case management system [as Odyssey], based on software developed by Tyler Technologies, 
Inc., which is also Vermont’s vendor, have provided timely access to CNS, and other 
credentialed members of the press, through a ‘Press Review Queue’ feature that allows CNS, at 
no cost to the court, to view newly filed complaints as soon as they are received by the court and 
without waiting for court staff to process them.” (Doc. 61 at 8 n.6) (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (alteration accepted). 

III.    Conclusions of Law and Analysis. 
      A.     Whether Plaintiffs Have a First Amendment Right of Access to Newly 
            Filed Civil Complaints. 
      “[I]t is well established that the public and the press have a  ‘qualified First 
Amendment right to attend judicial proceedings and to access certain judicial 
documents.’” Lugosch v. Pyramid Co. of Onondaga, 435 F.3d 110, 120 (2d Cir. 2006) 
(quoting Hartford Courant Co. v. Pellegrino, 380 F.3d 83, 91 (2d Cir. 2004)); Richmond 
Newspapers, Inc. v.  Virginia, 448 U.S. 555, 580 (1980) (recognizing a right of access 
“implicit in the guarantees of the First Amendment”).* “[T]he First Amendment goes 
beyond protection of the press and the self-expression of individuals to prohibit 
government from limiting the stock of information from which members of the public 
may draw.” Jd. at 575-76 (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting First Nat’l Bank of 
Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U.S. 765, 783 (1978)). 
      The Second Circuit has recognized a First Amendment right of public access “to 
civil trials and to their related proceedings and records.” New York Civ. Liberties Union 
v. N.Y.C. Transit Auth., 684 F.3d 286, 298 (2d Cir. 2012) (collecting cases). “[T]he need 
for public access . . . is grounded in the ‘need for federal courts . .  . to have a measure of 
accountability and for the public to have confidence in the administration of justice.’” 
Newsday LLC v. Cnty.  of Nassau, 730 F.3d 156, 164 (2d Cir. 2013) (quoting United 
States v. Amodeo, 71 F.3d 1044, 1048 (2d Cir.  1995)). 
      [The Second Circuit has] applied two different approaches when deciding 
      whether the First Amendment right applies to particular material. The 
      “experience and logic” approach applies to both judicial proceedings and 
      documents, and asks “both whether the documents have historically been 
      open to the press and general public and whether public access plays a 
      significant positive role in the functioning of the particular process in 

4 There is also a common law “general right to inspect and copy public records and documents, 
including judicial records and documents.” Bernstein v. Bernstein Litowitz Berger & Grossmann 
LLP, 814 F.3d 132, 142 (2d Cir. 2016) (quoting Nixon v.  Warner Commce’ns, Inc., 435 U.S. 589, 
597 (1978)). Plaintiffs allege only a violation of a First Amendment right of access, which 
provides more “substantive protection to the interests of the press and the public” than the 
common law. Lugosch, 435 F.3d at 124 (quoting Rushford v. New Yorker Mag., Inc., 846 F.2d 
249, 253 (4th Cir. 1988)). 

      question.” The second approach—which we adopt only when analyzing 
     judicial documents related to judicial proceedings covered by the First 
     Amendment right—asks whether the documents at issue “are derived from 
     or are a necessary corollary of the capacity to attend the relevant 
     proceedings.” 
Id. (citations omitted). 
     In Bernstein v. Bernstein Litowitz Berger & Grossmann LLP, the Second Circuit 
applied the “experience and logic” approach and found a presumptive First Amendment 
right of access to civil complaints. 814 F.3d 132, 141 (2d Cir. 2016). In so ruling, the 
Second Circuit noted that when a complaint is withheld, it “leaves the public unaware 
that a claim has been leveled and that state power has been invoked—and public 
resources spent—in an effort to resolve the dispute.” Jd. The public right of access 
generally attaches when a newly filed civil complaint is received by a court. See Lugosch, 
435 F.3d at 126 (emphasizing “the importance of immediate access where a  right to 
access is found[]”). 
     Defendants contend Plaintiffs seek instantaneous access to newly filed complaints 
akin to allowing a reporter to go behind the clerk’s desk and open a Vermont Superior 
Court’s mail. This comparison is nonsensical in the context of an electronic filing system. 
In Odyssey, there is no opening of an envelope or other physical handling that would 
make access upon filing impracticable. Instead, the only obstacle to immediate access to 
newly filed complaints is Defendants’ pre-access review process. In effect, Defendants 
purposefully withhold immediate access by placing newly filed complaints in a review 
queue where they may be reviewed in a matter of minutes, hours, or days with virtually 
no guarantee as to when they will become accessible to the public. The delay differs 
significantly among and within the fourteen Vermont Superior Courts, varies day by day, 
and occurs with no predictability. It is Defendants’ placement of newly filed complaints 
in this queue which must be justified under the First Amendment. 
     Because Plaintiffs have identified a First Amendment right to access to newly filed 
complaints, Defendants’ motion to dismiss the Amended Complaint under Rule 12(b)(6) 
for failure to state a plausible claim for relief must be DENIED. 

     B.     Whether the Case Should Be Dismissed as Moot. 
     Defendants argue the Complaint is partially moot and will soon be completely 
moot because the Vermont Superior Courts are centralizing their review process for civil 
filings which will expedite review. Defendants anticipate centralization will be made 
permanent by the end of 2021. By Defendants’ own admission, “[t]hese goals, of course, 
depend on the judiciary being able to fill all of the necessary positions, which it is 
working to do.” (Doc. 44 at 32.) 
     “Dismissal of a case for lack of subject matter jurisdiction under Rule 12(b)(1) is 
proper when the district court lacks the statutory or constitutional power to adjudicate it.” 
Doyle v. Midland Credit Mgmt., Inc., 722 F.3d 78, 80 (2d Cir. 2013) (quoting Ford v. 
D.C. 37 Union Local 1549, 579 F.3d 187, 188 (2d Cir. 2009)). “When a case becomes 
moot, the federal courts ‘lack[] subject matter jurisdiction over the action.’” Fox v. Bd. of 
Trs. of State Univ. of N.Y., 42 F.3d 135, 140 (2d Cir. 1994) (alteration in original) 
(quoting N.Y.C. Emps.’ Ret. Sys. v. Dole Food Co., 969 F.2d 1430, 1433 (2d Cir.  1992)). 
     “(T]he party asserting subject matter jurisdiction ‘has the burden of proving by a 
preponderance of the evidence that it exists.’” Tandon v. Captain’s Cove Marina of 
Bridgeport, Inc., 752 F.3d 239, 243 (2d Cir. 2014) (quoting Makarova v.  United States, 
201 F.3d 110, 113 (2d Cir. 2000)). “In resolving a motion to dismiss under Rule 12(b)(1), 
the district court must take all uncontroverted facts in the complaint (or petition) as true, 
and draw all reasonable inferences in favor of the party asserting jurisdiction.” Jd. 
“Where jurisdictional facts are placed in dispute, the court has the power and obligation 
to decide issues of fact by reference to evidence outside the pleadings.” Jd. (quoting 
APWU v. Potter, 343 F.3d 619, 627 (2d Cir. 2003)). 
         defendant cannot automatically moot a case simply by ending its unlawful 
conduct once sued.” Already, LLC v. Nike, Inc., 568 U.S. 85, 91 (2013). Instead, “a 
defendant claiming that its voluntary compliance moots a case bears the formidable 
burden of showing that it is absolutely clear the allegedly wrongful behavior could not 
reasonably be expected to recur.” Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Env’t Servs. 
(TOC), Inc., 528 U.S. 167, 190 (2000); see also Lamar Advert.  of Penn, LLC v. Town of 

Orchard Park, 356 F.3d 365, 375 (2d Cir. 2004) (“The voluntary cessation of allegedly 
illegal conduct usually will render a case moot ‘if the defendant can demonstrate that 
(1) there is no reasonable expectation that the alleged violation will recur and (2) interim 
relief or events have completely and irrevocably eradicated the effects of the alleged 
violation.”””) (quoting Granite State Outdoor Advert., Inc. v.   Town of Orange, 303 F.3d 
450, 451 (2d Cir. 2002)). “Where, as here, the defendant is a government entity, ‘[s]ome 
deference must be accorded to a [governmental body’s] representations that certain 
conduct has been discontinued.’” Lamar Advert. of Penn, LLC, 356 F.3d 365 (first 
alteration in original). In this case, however, Defendants do not claim pre-access delay 
has ceased; they merely assert they are working on the Odyssey rollout and a 
centralization process and should be afforded additional time to complete those tasks. 
     As Plaintiffs point out, this case has been pending since May 20, 2021, Odyssey 
was first implemented in March 2020, and newly filed complaints still “sit in electronic 
queues, sometimes for days, waiting to be reviewed and processed before being made 
public.” (Doc. 26 at 8.) Plaintiffs therefore contend that their claims are not moot. The 
court agrees. 
     Because Defendants have not voluntarily ceased the pre-access review process 
which Plaintiffs challenge, Plaintiffs’ First Amendment claim is not moot. See Schaefer, 
2 F.4th at 323 (“While the [Defendants’] improvements in rates of access are 
commendable, absent the relief Courthouse News [seeks], ‘nothing bars [Defendants] 
from reverting’ to the allegedly unconstitutional rates of access in the future.”) (quoting 
Porter v. Clarke, 852 F.3d 358, 365 (4th Cir. 2017)). Defendants’ motion to dismiss on 
mootness grounds is therefore DENIED. 
     C.     Whether the Court Should Abstain From Exercising Jurisdiction. 
     As an alternative ground for dismissal, Defendants argue the court should abstain 
from exercising jurisdiction based on principles of comity, equity, and federalism.° In the 

> Whether abstention is properly analyzed under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(1) is not settled law. 
Compare lacovacci v. Brevet Holdings, LLC, 437 F. Supp. 3d 367, 374 (S.D.N.Y. 2020) (“A 
motion to abstain is considered as a motion to dismiss for lack of subject matter jurisdiction 

Second Circuit, abstention is “not a jurisdictional bar based on Article III requirements, 
but instead a prudential limitation on the court’s exercise of jurisdiction grounded in 
equitable considerations of comity.” Kaufman v. Kaye, 466 F.3d 83, 88 n.1 (2d Cir. 2006) 
(quoting Spargo v. New York State Comm’n on Jud. Conduct, 351 F.3d 65, 74 (2d Cir. 
2003)). 
     Ordinarily, “federal courts have a  strict duty to exercise the jurisdiction that 
     is conferred upon them by Congress.” But the Supreme Court has 
     recognized some “carefully defined” situations in which courts may 
     abstain. To ensure that abstention remains “the exception, not the rule,” 
     federal courts may abstain only if a case falls into one of these “specific 
     doctrines     
Schaefer, 2 F.4th at 324 (citations omitted). 
     Defendants cite Courthouse News Service v. Brown, 908 F.3d 1063 (7th Cir. 
2018), in support of abstention. In that case, the Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit 
concluded that the “principle of comity takes on special force when federal courts are 
asked to decide how state courts should conduct their business[,]” and a federal court 
should therefore “step back” while a state court transitions to electronic filing and works 
through the “implementation challenges and resource limitations” associated with the 
transition. Jd. at 1074. The Seventh Circuit recognized that none of the “principal 
categories of abstention” were applicable but nonetheless found abstention “avoid[s] the 
problems that federal oversight and intrusion ... might cause.” /d. at 1071. In 
Courthouse News Service v. Gilmer, the Eastern District of Missouri followed Brown and 
abstained because it did not want to “dictate to, oversee, or otherwise insert itself into 

pursuant to [Federal] Rule {of Civil Procedure] 12(b)(1).”) (alteration in original) (quoting 
Wilmington Tr., Nat’l Ass'n v. Est.  of McClendon, 287 F. Supp. 3d 353, 360 (S.D.N.Y. 2018))) 
with Kilroy v. Mayhew, 841 F. Supp. 2d 414, 416 (D. Me. 2012) (“This Court has previously 
noted that ‘abstention is a prudential rather than a jurisdictional ground for dismissal,’ and, 
therefore, when considering abstention it does ‘not rely upon the pleading or burden 
requirements of either Rule 12(b)(1) or Rule 12(b)(6).””) (quoting Christian Action Network v. 
Maine, 679 F. Supp. 2d 140, 143 n.2 (D. Me. 2010)); see also Vereline v.  Woodsville Guar. Sav. 
Bank, 2015 WL 9216684, at *2 (D. Vt. Dec. 16, 2015) (“A motion to dismiss based on the 
abstention doctrine may be analyzed under Rule 12(b)(1).”) (emphasis supplied) (collecting 
cases). 

the .  .  . operations and administration of its co-equal Missouri state courts” nor “impose 
on a  state court a practice which is not currently employed by the Supreme Court of the 
United States.” 2021 WL 2438914, at #9 (E.D. Mo. June 15, 2021). Other courts have not 
followed suit, and Brown and Gilmer remain outliers. 
     The Second Circuit has not ruled on abstention in the context of a challenge to 
pre-access review but has found abstention appropriate in cases “challenging the internal 
workings of state courts.” Kaufman, 466 F.3d at 86 (collecting cases). In Kaufman, the 
plaintiff sought a declaratory judgment that New York state judicial appellate panel 
assignment procedures violated due process and requested the court to mandate by way 
of an injunction a new system for appellate panel assignments. Jd. at 84. The Second 
Circuit found abstention appropriate because, among other things: 
     [A]ny remedy fashioned by the state would then be subject to further 
     challenges in the district court. Appellant—or any state court litigant 
     dissatisfied with the panel of judges assigned to his or her appeal—could 
     raise compliance issues under the putative federal injunction claiming that 
     the state court’s chosen remedy violated the Constitution or the terms of 
     that injunction. Such challenges would inevitably lead to precisely the kind 
     of “piecemeal interruptions of . . . state proceedings” condemned in O'Shea 
     [v. Littleton, 414 U.S. 488 (1974)]. In short, we cannot resolve the issues 
     raised here as to present assignment procedures without committing to 
     resolving the same issues as to the remedy chosen by the state and as to the 
     subsequent case-by-case implementation of the assignment procedures in 
     the Second Department. This is exactly what O ‘Shea forbids. 
Id. at 87. 
     Similarly, in Disability Rights New York v. New York, 916 F.3d 129, 134 (2d Cir. 
2019), the Second Circuit rejected a request for an injunction requiring the New York 
courts to (1) notify litigants about rights to request modifications to proceedings; (2) hold 
proceedings that “‘provide augmented and substantive and procedural rights[;]” and 
(3) cease adjudications “until defendants ensure that the proceedings provide [requested] 
substantive and procedural rights[.]” /d. at 136. In upholding the district court’s 
abstention, the Second Circuit cited Brown with approval and found that a federal court’s 
ruling would govern “the occurrence of specific events that might take place” in future 

state court proceedings and therefore represented the same threat of “ongoing, case-by- 
case oversight of state courts” present in Kaufman. Id. 
     An adjudication of this case does not require the piecemeal disruption to and 
intervention in state proceedings at issue in Kaufman and Disability Rights. There is no 
risk of “case-by-case implementation[,]” Kaufman, 466 F.3d at 87, because the remedy 
here is “more akin to [a] bright-line finding . . . than [an] ongoing monitoring of the 
substance of state proceedings|[,]” and because “[a]n injunction requiring the [state 
courts] to provide . .  . access to filed . . . civil complaints poses little risk of an ‘ongoing 
federal audit’ or ‘a major continuing intrusion of the equitable power of the federal courts 
into the daily conduct of state . .  . proceedings.’” Courthouse News Serv. v. Planet, 750 
F.3d 776, 791-92 (9th Cir. 2014) (quoting O’Shea, 414 U.S. at 500). The Southern 
District of New York reached this same conclusion in a pre-access review case strikingly 
similar to the instant one. See Transcript of Hearing on Plaintiff's Motion for Preliminary 
Injunction at 47-48; Courthouse News Serv. v. Tingling, 2016 WL 8505086, at *1 
(S.D.N.Y. Dec. 16, 2016), 2016 WL 8739010 (hereinafter, “Tingling’’). 
     The Second Circuit, itself, has cautioned that “the weight of the First Amendment 
issues involved counsels against abstaining.” Hartford Courant Co., 380 F.3d at 85, 100 
(declining to abstain in right of access case where court was asked to determine “whether 
the public and press have a qualified First Amendment right to inspect docket sheets and, 
if so, the appropriate remedy for its violation by state courts”); see also Planet, 750 F.3d 
at 787 (“We disfavor abstention in First Amendment cases because of the risk . . . that the 
delay that results from abstention will itself chill the exercise of the rights that the 
plaintiffs seek to protect by suit”) (ellipsis in original) (internal quotation marks and 
citations omitted). It has thus “carefully defined . . . the areas in which such abstention is 
permissible, and [abstention] remains the exception, not the rule.” Hachamovitch v. 
DeBuono, 159 F.3d 687, 697 (2d Cir. 1998) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
     Because this case does not fit within traditional abstention categories and because 
it will neither result in piecemeal litigation, nor require continuing federal oversight of 
state court proceedings, abstention on the grounds of comity, equity, and federalism is not 

required. See Bethphage Lutheran Serv., Inc. v.  Weicker, 965 F.2d 1239, 1245 (2d Cir. 
1992) (“[T]here is little or no discretion to abstain in a case which does not meet 
traditional abstention requirements.”) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Mobil 
Oil Corp. v. City of Long Beach, 772 F.2d 534, 540 (9th Cir. 1985)). Defendants’ motion 
to dismiss on abstention grounds is therefore DENIED. 
     D.     Whether Plaintiffs’ First Amendment Right of Access Was Violated. 
     A qualified First Amendment right of access attaches when a complaint is 
electronically filed. See Courthouse News Serv. v. Planet, 947 F.3d 581, 585 (9th Cir. 
2020) (“[T]he press has a qualified right of timely access to newly filed civil 
nonconfidential complaints that attaches when the complaint is filed.”); Courthouse News □ 
Serv. v. New Mexico Admin. Off. of the Cts., 2021 WL 4710644, at *39 (D.N.M. Oct. 8, 
2021) (“The qualified right ‘attaches when the complaint is filed’ in a traditional sense— 
when it is in the court’s possession[.|””) (quoting Planet, 947 F.3d at 585). “[The Second 
Circuit’s] public access cases and those in other circuits emphasize the importance of 
immediate access where a  right to access is found.” Lugosch, 435 F.3d at 126 (collecting 
cases). “The constitutional right of access, however, is not absolute, and must, in certain 
circumstances, ‘give way . . . to other rights or interests[.]’” ABC, Inc. v. Stewart, 360 
F.3d 90, 98 (2d Cir. 2004) (alteration in original) (citing Waller v. Georgia, 467 U.S. 39, 
45 (1984)). 
     “Once a First Amendment right of access to judicial documents is found, the 
documents ‘may be [removed from public access] only if specific, on the record findings 
are made demonstrating that [this restriction] is essential to preserve higher values and is 
narrowly tailored to serve that interest.’” United States v. Erie Cnty., 763 F.3d 235, 239 
(2d Cir. 2014) (addressing document sealing) (alteration in original) (quoting Lugosch, 
435 F.3d at 120); see also Planet, 947 F.3d at 596 (“[Defendant] must demonstrate first 
that there is a ‘substantial probability’ that its interest in the fair and orderly 
administration of justice would be impaired by immediate access, and second, that no 
reasonable alternatives exist to ‘adequately protect’ that government interest.”) (citations 
omitted). “Broad and general findings and conclusory assertions are insufficient to justify 

deprivation of public access to the record[.]” Bernstein, 814 F.3d at 144-45 (internal 
quotation marks and citations omitted) (alteration accepted). 
     Defendants must justify withholding a document to which there is a First 
Amendment right of access. See, e.g., Bernstein, 814 F.3d at 144 (“To overcome the First 
Amendment right of access, the proponent of sealing must ‘demonstratfe] that closure is 
essential to preserve higher values and is narrowly tailored to serve that interest.’’’) 
(alterations in original) (quoting In re N.Y. Times Co., 828 F.2d 110, 116 (2d Cir. 1987)).® 
In order to find this burden has been satisfied, a court must make “‘specific, on the record 
findings . .  . demonstrating that [withholding] is essential to preserve higher values and is 
narrowly tailored to serve that interest.’” In re N.Y. Times Co., 828 F.2d at 116 (quoting 
Press-Enter. Co., 478 U.S. 13-14). 
     Although courts agree on the importance of First Amendment access, they differ 
as to how much delay, if any, can be tolerated consistent with the U.S. Constitution. 
Some courts have held that the First Amendment “does not require . . . instantaneous 
access” and provides “some leeway where same-day access would be impracticable[.]” 
Schaefer, 2 F.4th at 328. The Second Circuit has held that public access must be 
immediate and contemporaneous: 
     In light of the values which the presumption of access endeavors to 
     promote, a necessary corollary to the presumption is that once found to be 
     appropriate, access should be immediate and contemporaneous. . .  . The 
     newsworthiness of a particular story is often fleeting. To delay or postpone 
     disclosure undermines the benefit of public scrutiny and may have the same 
     result as complete suppression. 

6 See also Tingling, 2016 WL 8739010 (finding “the clerk” had the “burden of demonstrating 
that its policy of refusing to provide public and press access to newly filed complaints until they 
are processed is [] essential to preserve higher values [and] is narrowly tailored to serve a 
substantial government interest”); Planet, 947 F.3d at 596 (“[Defendants] must demonstrate 
[rigorous scrutiny is satisfied.]”); Courthouse News Serv. v. Schaefer, 2 F.4th 318, 329 (4th Cir. 
2021) (“Clerks offered no evidence . . . to carry the government’s burden.”) (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted); Courthouse News Serv. v. New Mexico Admin. Off. of the Cts., 2021 
WL 4710644, at *41 (D.N.M. Oct. 8, 2021) (relying on Planet). 

Lugosch, 435 F.3d at 127 (quoting Grove Fresh Distrib., Inc. v. Everfresh Juice Co., 24 
F.3d 893, 897 (7th Cir.  1994) (internal quotation marks omitted)). Courts, in turn, have 
grappled with the correct definition of “contemporaneous.” For example, although the 
Eastern District of Virginia noted that Black’s Law Dictionary defined 
“contemporaneous” as “occurring . .  . at the same time” and Merriam-Webster’s 
dictionary used similar language, it nonetheless defined “contemporaneous” “in this 
context” to mean “on the same day of filing, insofar as practicable and if not practicable 
within one court day.” Courthouse News Serv. v. Schaefer, 440 F. Supp. 3d 532, 559 
(E.D. Va. 2020). The Fourth Circuit endorsed this “flexible standard” and found it 
consistent with its case law defining “contemporaneous” to mean “as expeditiously as 
possible.” Schaefer, 2 F.4that 328. In New Mexico Admin. Off. of the Cts., 2021 WL 
4710644, at *41, the court permitted no greater than five business hours of pre-access 
delay because that “comes closest to the traditional right of access that the press had to 
civil complaints” prior to efiling. 
     Although some courts have sought to impose a bright-line rule for permissible 
delay, here the focus must be on whether any delay is appropriate because any restriction 
on the First Amendment right of access must have “sufficient justification.” Newsday, 
730 F.3d at 165; see also Planet, 947 F.3d at 596 (requiring justification for any delay to 
“immediate access” to newly filed complaints); Tingling (questioning defendant’s 
justification of First Amendment restriction for “ministerial review”). As the Second 
Circuit has observed, when a governmental entity contends that the “limited denial of 
access” is insubstantial, it “begs the question of whether there was a sufficient factual 
basis for denying access at all.” ABC, Inc., 360 F.3d at 100. 
     Defendants urge this court to find that their stated interests in the administration of 
justice and confidentiality justify a delay in the First Amendment right of access. Their 
proof in support of these stated interests is scant. They claim their rates of access are fast 
by national standards,’ but they exclude the federal courts from their analysis and use 

7 Defendants’ reliance on the “experience and logic” test for this argument is misplaced. In the 
Second Circuit, the “experience and logic” approach merely determines “whether the First 

unreliable data from Plaintiff CNS’s publication dates as support for an acceptable period 
of delay. The issue before the court is not how fast Plaintiffs cover new filings or whether 
Defendants’ delay is comparable to that of other courts, but whether Defendants’ pre- 
access review process is necessary to protect a higher interest and is narrowly tailored to 
achieve it. As this court noted, but for the pre-access review process, there would be no 
delay: 
      [T]here would be no delay in an e-filing system. There could be 1,000 
     complaints; there could be 100,000 complaints. There’s no delay. The only 
      delay that’s going to show up in e-filing is when you insert a staff member 
      into it to do something else. Right? Because [efilers are filing] with all of 
     the document information that they need, and it’s hitting the docket, and 
     there isn’t any step in between there by staff. . .  . So that, by definition, 
     means that the delay is in this review process. 
(Doc. 57 at 26:24-27:10.) 
     Defendants seek to justify much of the delay inherent in their pre-access review 
process by citing the Vermont Superior Courts’ interest in the protection of the privacy of 
litigants and third-parties in confidential information. This interest is an important one. 
See United States v. Doe, 63 F.3d 121, 127 (2d Cir. 1995) (“[T]he privacy interests of 
individuals may also warrant [courtroom] closure orders in certain circumstances.’’) 
(collecting cases); cf Seattle Times Co. v. Rhinehart, 467 U.S. 20, 35 (1984) (recognizing 
“substantial interest” in, among other things, the “privacy interests of litigants and third 
parties”). It does not, however, trump the First Amendment right of access unless the pre- 
access review process is also narrowly tailored and “essential to preserve higher 
values|.|” Bernstein, 814 F.3d at 144. 
      E.     Whether Defendants’ Pre-Access Review Process is Narrowly Tailored. 
      To be narrowly tailored, Defendants must prove that “reasonable alternatives” to 
their pre-access review process cannot “adequately protect” their asserted interests. Id. 

Amendment right applies to particular material{,)”’ Newsday LLC v. Cnty. of Nassau, 730 F.3d 
156, 164 (2d Cir. 2013) (emphasis supplied), it does not dictate the acceptable measure of delay. 

      Defendants offer no evidence that staff review of signatures, filing fees, and filing 
codes is necessary to protect the orderly administration of justice. See Planet, 947 F.3d at 
597 (finding no evidence that immediate access resulted in “accounting issues|,]” 
“compromised the quality and accuracy of information logged into the [case management 
system,]” “created efficiency problems[,]” or “resulted in loss, destruction, or mutilation 
of, or otherwise compromised the ‘integrity’ of, case files”); see also Courthouse News 
Serv. v. Jackson, 2009 WL 2163609, at *4 (S.D. Tex. July 20, 2009) (finding twenty-four 
to seventy-two hour delays to verify correct case number, proper court, accurate title, and 
proper filing category were not narrowly tailored). Indeed, Odyssey’s software system 
performs these same functions. 
     It is only Defendants’ pre-access review for confidential information which is not 
automated in any respect. Although Defendants claim this review can be performed in 
approximately twenty minutes, it often takes several days to complete. Because it 
requires human intervention, the amount of time involved varies from day to day and 
court to court. At times, the delay involved is unjustifiable by any measure. There is, 
moreover, no guarantee when public access will be provided. Although centralization has 
improved the degree of delay it, too, involves human intervention which, in turn, is 
dependent on adequate staffing and other resource considerations. 
      As for protecting privacy interests, out of 4,156 electronically filed civil 
complaints, only three exhibits to two complaints were rejected during the pre-access 
review process because they contained confidential information. This is a minute fraction 
of the total complaints filed and demonstrates that the pre-access review process is not 
“essential to preserve higher values[.]” Bernstein, 814 F.3d at 144. Defendants cite no 
evidence that they experienced significant confidentiality breaches prior to the 
implementation of pre-access review, nor do they cite any court in the country that has 
found a similar process necessary. 
      Although Defendants argue that the absence of pre-access review would place “the 
onus solely on filers” and would “less effectively protect the integrity of the civil 
litigation process and privacy interests,” (Doc. 44 at 30), the Vermont Superior Court 

filing rules already place primary responsibility on filers. See V.R.P.A.C.R. 7(a)(1)(A) 
(“[T]he filer of a case record, whether in physical or electronic form, [must] determine 
whether all or part of the record being filed is not publicly accessible”); V.R.P.A.C.R. 
7(a)(1)(B) (requiring filer to certify compliance with V.R.P.A.C.R.). Defendants provide 
no evidence that these safeguards, combined with post-access review, are insufficient. To 
the contrary, Defendants’ own evidence reveals that placing the onus on filers has been 
overwhelmingly effective. 
     The Tingling decision is instructive. There, the clerk in  a New York state court 
“review|[ed] the proposed filing for [compliance] with venue, caption, case type, as well 
as the attorney’s signature certification required by court rule[]” “to ascertain whether 
they contain materials that, by operation of law, may not be made available to the general 
public.” Only after completing the review process were complaints made available to the 
public. The clerk argued that the review was necessary to ensure compliance with filing 
rules and “to prevent a narrow category of errant pleadings at the outset in order to 
prevent confusion and waste.” The Southern District of New York rejected this argument 
and found the clerk “failed to meet its burden of demonstrating that its policy of refusing 
to provide the public and press access to newly filed complaints until after they are 
reviewed and logged is either essential to preserve higher values or is narrowly tailored to 
serve that interest.” A similar outcome is warranted here. 
      Because Defendants fail to demonstrate a “substantial probability” that the orderly 
administration of justice and privacy rights of litigants and third parties would be 
significantly impaired without their pre-access review, that practice cannot withstand 
constitutional scrutiny. Press-Enter. Co., 478 U.S. 1, 14.  A  policy is not narrowly tailored 
if “a substantial portion of the burden . .  . does not serve to advance [Defendants’] goals.” 
Mastrovincenzo v. City of New York, 435 F.3d 78, 98 (2d Cir. 2006). Against this 
backdrop, “it is the responsibility of the district court to ensure that [any restriction on 
access to] documents to which the public has a First Amendment right is no broader than 
necessary|[.]” United States v. Aref, 533 F.3d 72, 82 (2d Cir. 2008). 

      Timely public access to court documents “allows the public to understand the 
activity of the . .  . courts, enhances the court system’s accountability and legitimacy, and 
informs the public of matters of public concern.” Bernstein, 814 F.3d at 141. Defendants’ 
pre-access review thwarts these objectives in an inconsistent, unpredictable, and 
unjustifiable manner. 
      Because Defendants have failed to sustain their burden to demonstrate that their 
pre-access review process is justified by higher interests and narrowly tailored to advance 
those interests, Defendants have violated the public’s and Plaintiffs’ First Amendment 
right of access to newly filed complaints. 
      F.     Whether Plaintiffs Are Entitled to Injunctive Relief. 
     A plaintiff seeking a permanent injunction must establish “(1) that it has suffered 
an irreparable injury; (2) that remedies available at law, such as monetary damages, are 
inadequate to compensate for that injury; (3) that, considering the balance of hardships 
between the plaintiff and defendant, a remedy in equity is warranted; and (4) that the 
public interest would not be disserved by a permanent injunction.” Monsanto Co. v. 
Geertson Seed Farms, 561 U.S.  139, 156-57 (2010) (quoting eBay v. MercExchange, 
L.L.C., 547 U.S. 388, 391 (2006)). “An injunction is a matter of equitable discretion; it 
does not follow from success on the merits as a matter of course.” Winter v. Nat. Res. 
Def. Council, Inc., 555 U.S. 7, 32 (2008). 
      To demonstrate irreparable harm, the moving party must establish an injury that is 
not remote or speculative but “certain and imminent harm for which a monetary award 
does not adequately compensate.” Wisdom Imp. Sales Co. v. Labatt Brewing Co., 339 
F.3d 101, 113 (2d Cir. 2003). “Because the deprivation of First Amendment rights is an 
irreparable harm, in First Amendment cases ‘the likelihood of success on the merits is the 
dominant, if not the dispositive, factor.’” Agudath Israel of Am. v. Cuomo, 983 F.3d 620, 
637 (2d Cir. 2020) (quoting N.Y. Progress & Prot. PAC v.  Walsh, 733 F.3d 483, 488 (2d 
Cir. 2013)); see also  SAM Party  of N.Y. v. Kosinski, 987 F.3d 267, 278 (2d Cir. 2021) 
(“The presence of irreparable injury to First Amendment rights, however, ‘turns on 
whether the plaintiff has shown a  clear likelihood of success on the merits[.]’”) (quoting 

Beal v. Stern, 184 F.3d 117, 123-24 (2d Cir. 1999)). 
     Plaintiffs have established that Defendants are violating their First Amendment 
right of access to newly filed complaints through the Vermont Superior Courts’ pre- 
access review process and that an “injunction will prevent the feared deprivation.” Bronx 
Household of Faith v. Bd.  of Educ. of City of N.Y., 331 F.3d 342, 350 (2d Cir. 2003). 
They have thus established irreparable harm. See New York Civ. Liberties Union, 684 
F.3d at 305 (holding plaintiffs “would be irreparably harmed through the continued 
violation of [their First Amendment right of access]”). They have further established that 
their irreparable harm is ongoing. As the Ninth Circuit recently explained: 
     CNS’s reporting on complaints must be timely to be newsworthy and to 
     allow for ample and meaningful public discussion regarding the functioning 
     of our nation’s court systems. .. . [T]he public interest in obtaining news is 
     an interest in obtaining contemporaneous news. . . . Thus, that “old” news is 
     not worthy of, and does not receive, much public attention has been widely 
     recognized . . . [and] the need for immediacy of reporting news “is even 
     more vital in the digital age,” where timeliness is measured in terms of 
     minutes or seconds. 
Planet, 947 F.3d at 594 (citations omitted). 
      “Tn a suit against the government, balancing of the equities merges into our 
consideration of the public interest.” S4M Party of N.Y., 987 F.3d at 278 (citing New 
York v.  U.S. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., 969 F.3d 42, 58-59 (2d Cir. 2020)). In this case, the 
balance of hardships tips in Plaintiffs’ favor because the public interest is served by 
timely reporting on the operations of the courts and because “securing First Amendment 
rights is in the public interest.” N.Y. Progress & Prot. PAC, 733 F.3d at 488. 
Correspondingly, “‘[nJo public interest is served by maintaining an unconstitutional policy 
when constitutional alternatives are available to achieve the same goal.” Agudath Israel 
of Am., 983 F.3d at 637. 
      Although “the Government has traditionally been granted the widest latitude in the 
dispatch of its own internal affairs,” Rizzo v. Goode, 423 U.S. 362, 378-79 (1976) 
(internal quotation marks omitted), and “courts of equity should pay particular regard for 
the public consequences in employing the extraordinary remedy of injunction[,]” the 

court can safeguard these interests by limiting the scope of its injunction. Weinberger v. 
Romero-Barcelo, 456 U.S. 305, 312 (1982) (citations omitted). Plaintiffs’ request for an 
injunction prohibiting enforcement of all “policies and practices that deny Plaintiffs 
contemporaneous access to newly filed civil complaints” and “prohibiting [Defendants] 
from applying [V.R.P.A.C.R.] 7(a)(3)” is overbroad. (Doc. 16 at 21.) An injunction 
addressing only the specifically challenged pre-access review process and leaving 
internal procedures to the Vermont Superior Courts is more appropriate. This type of 
injunction “in no way restricts or comments on the regulations that are in place for 
[Defendants] to review and accept for filing . .  . complaints when they are filed.” 
Tingling. 
     For the foregoing reasons, Plaintiffs’ request for permanent injunctive relief is 
GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART. Defendants are hereby ENJOINED from 
prohibiting public access to newly filed civil complaints which have not been designated 
confidential by the filer until the Vermont Superior Court has completed a pre-access 
review process. Defendants may continue to restrict public access post-filing where a 
potential violation of their filing rules has been found. 
     G.    Whether Plaintiffs Are Entitled to Declaratory Relief. 
     The Second Circuit has identified five factors to consider in deciding whether to 
issue a declaratory judgment: 
     (i) whether the judgment will serve a useful purpose in clarifying or settling 
     the legal issues involved; (ii) whether a judgment would finalize the 
     controversy and offer relief from uncertainty; (iii) whether the proposed 
     remedy is being used merely for procedural fencing or a race to res 
     judicata; (iv) whether the use of a declaratory judgment would increase 
     friction between sovereign legal systems or improperly encroach on the 
     domain of a state or foreign court; and (v) whether there is a better or more 
     effective remedy. 
New York Times Co. v. Gonzales, 459 F.3d 160, 167 (2d Cir. 2006) (internal quotation 
marks omitted) (quoting Dow Jones & Co. v. Harrods Ltd., 346 F.3d 357, 359-360 (2d 
Cir. 2003)). Declaratory relief in this case would serve no purpose which the court’s 
permanent injunction has not achieved. Accordingly, Plaintiffs’ request for declaratory 

relief is DENIED. 
                               CONCLUSION 
     For the foregoing reasons, the court DENIES AS MOOT Plaintiffs’ motion for 
preliminary injunction (Doc. 26), DENIES Defendants’ motion to dismiss (Doc. 43), 
GRANTS IN PART and DENIES IN PART Plaintiffs’ request for permanent injunctive 
relief, and DENIES Plaintiffs’ request for declaratory relief. (Doc. 16.) Defendants are 
HEREBY ENJOINED from delaying public access to electronically filed civil complaints 
until the Vermont Superior Courts’ pre-access review process is complete. 
SO ORDERED.                                         fu 
      Dated at Burlington, in the District of Vermont, this [F day of November, 2021. 

                                   United States District Court