UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                           
                   DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                             

DAHUA TECHNOLOGY USA INC.,     *                                         
                               *                                         
      Plaintiff and Counterclaim Defendant,  *                           
                               *                                         
          v.                   *    Civil Action No. 1:18-cv-11147-IT    
                               *                                         
FENG ZHANG,                    *                                         
                               *                                         
      Defendant and Counterclaim Plaintiff.  *                           


                     MEMORANDUM & ORDER                                  

                           May 30, 2024                                  

TALWANI, D.J.                                                             

    On March 28, 2024, this court entered an Amended Judgment [Doc. No. 214] in favor of 
Counterclaim Plaintiff Feng Zhang on his breach of contract claim against Counterclaim 
Defendant Dahua Technology USA Inc. (“Dahua”) and awarded him $16,953,787.88 plus post-
judgment interest as provided by law. See Am. J. [Doc. No. 214]. On April 9, 2024, Dahua filed 
a Notice of Appeal [Doc. No. 215]. Now pending before the court are Zhang’s Request for 
Issuance of Writ of Execution [Doc. No. 218] and Motion for Leave to Register this Court’s 
Amended Judgment in [the Central District of] California [Doc. No. 227]. Dahua opposes both 
filings. See Opp. to Req. for Issuance of Writ [Doc. No. 226]; Resp. to Mot. [Doc. No. 229]. For 
the reasons stated below, Zhang’s Request [Doc. No. 218] and Motion [Doc. No. 227] are 
GRANTED.                                                                  
    Dahua opposes Zhang’s Request for Issuance of Writ of Execution [Doc. No. 218] on the 
basis that Dahua does not “own or maintain any assets or other property physically located in 
Massachusetts.” Opp. to Req. for Issuance of Writ 1 [Doc. No. 226]. Therefore, Dahua contends, 
Zhang fails to establish “any factual basis for” or the “utility of obtaining” a writ of execution 
from this court. Id.; see also id. at 2–3 (arguing that it would be “futile” for the court to issue a 
writ of execution against Dahua in Massachusetts). Contrary to Dahua’s arguments, Zhang does 
have a legal and factual basis for obtaining a writ of execution: a money judgment is enforced by 

a writ of execution, see Fed. R. Civ. P. 69(a), and Zhang has obtained a money judgment of 
$16.9 million against Dahua. Dahua does not point to one case—and this court has not found 
any—for the proposition that the potential absence of assets in the judgment district is a reason to 
deny issuing a writ of execution.                                         
    Zhang still has the burden to identify for the United States Marshal Service (“USMS”) 
the specific property in this district to be seized before the USMS will be able to enforce the writ 
of execution. Nonetheless, the court sees no bar to issuing the writ of execution, and accordingly, 
GRANTS Zhang’s Request [Doc. No. 218] for a writ of execution.            
    Pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1963, a party can register a district court judgment in another 
district “by filing a certified copy of the judgment in any other district . . . when the judgment has 

become final by appeal or expiration of the time for appeal or when ordered by the court that 
entered the judgment for good cause shown.” Where Dahua’s appeal is pending, Zhang may not 
register the judgment in another district absent order of this court, and the court will grant his 
motion only “for good cause shown.”                                       
    The “good cause” route for registering judgments despite the pendency of an appeal was 
added to the statute, see Pub L. 100–702, § 1002, 102 Stat. 4664 (1988), to prevent situations 
where a judgment debtor could “take advantage of the delay entailed by the appeal and remove 
his property from the other district, frustrating potential enforcement there even if his appeal did 
not succeed.” Siegel, Commentary on 1988 Revision; see also Pac. Reinsurance Mgmt. Corp. v. 

                               2                                         
Fabe, 929 F.2d 1215, 1218 (7th Cir. 1991) (“This language entered the statute in 1988 to deal 
with the anomaly that a judgment for which no supersedeas bond had been posted was 
enforceable during appeal only in the rendering district.”); Woodward & Dickerson v. Kahn, 
1993 WL 106129, at *1 n.1 (S.D.N.Y. Apr. 2, 1993) (explaining that the absence of the “good 

cause” provision in the original statute allowed debtors “to obtain a de facto stay of execution 
without submitting a supersedeas bond as required by Rule 62(d)”).        
    Courts have found that “good cause” is established “upon a mere showing that the [party 
against whom the judgment has been entered] has substantial property in the other [foreign] 
district and insufficient [property] in the rendering district to satisfy the judgment.” Jack Frost 
Labs., Inc. v. Physicians & Nurses Mfg. Corp., 951 F. Supp. 51, 52 (S.D.N.Y. 1997) (internal 
quotation marks omitted) (citing Woodward & Dickerson, 1993 WL 106129, at *1, and other 
district court decisions). A district court in this circuit found “good cause” to register in Rhode 
Island a judgment against the defendant entered in Maine based on an uncontested statement that 
the defendant corporation had its principal place of business in Rhode Island. See Cianbro Corp. 

v. George H. Dean, Inc., 749 F. Supp. 2d 1, 2–3 (D. Me. 2010). And the Seventh Circuit has 
noted in upholding a good cause finding that “Section 1963 does not call for magic words or 
require district judgments to write opinions,” where “[e]veryone understood that [appellant’s] 
assets were elsewhere” and appellant failed to post a supersedeas bond.” Pac. Reinsurance 
Mgmt. Corp., 929 F.2d at 1218.                                            
    This court finds that Zhang has demonstrated good cause. First, it has been more than 
thirty (30) days since the court entered judgment and Dahua has not “provide[d] a bond or other 
security” as required for a stay of proceedings by Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 62(b) and 
Local Rule 62.2. To now allow Dahua to block Zhang from executing the Amended Judgment 

                               3                                         
[#214] would further precisely the kind of litigation behavior that Section 1963 was enacted—
and explicitly amended—to prevent.                                        
    Second, Dahua states that it does not have assets, customers, inventory, offices or 
property in Massachusetts. See Opp. to Req. for Issuance of Writ 2–3. Therefore, it follows that 

Dahua has “insufficient” assets in this forum to satisfy the $16.9 million judgment against it.  
    Third, Dahua has acknowledged that it is “a California corporation with its principal 
place of business in Irvine, California.” See Decl. of Kun Huang Lin, Ex. 1 to Opp. for Req. for 
Issuance of Writ [#226-1].                                                
    Dahua contends that the residence of a defendant in another district from where judgment 
was entered is not sufficient to establish “good cause” absent a showing of “substantial assets” in 
the other jurisdiction. See Dahua’s Resp. 2–3 [#229] (relying in part on Bingham v. Zolt, 823 F. 
Supp. 1126 (S.D.N.Y. 1993), aff’d, 66 F.3d 553 (2d Cir. 1995)). Bingham is easily distinguished, 
as it involved an individual defendant whose mere residence in another district was not found 
sufficient to demonstrate the presence of any assets in that district. Id. at 1136. Here, in contrast, 

Dahua is a corporation with its principal place of business in the state where Zhang seeks to 
register the judgment. Cf. Hertz Corp. v. Friend, 559 U.S. 77, 130 S. Ct. 1181, 1192–93 (2010) 
(noting that a corporation’s “principal place of business” is its “nerve center” and “normally . . . 
its headquarters).                                                        
    In Pharmacy Corporation of America v. Concord Healthcare Group, LLC, 2017 WL 
10832155 (W.D. Ky. Oct. 5, 2017), on which Dahua also relies, the court ordered the party 
seeking to register the judgment to refile its motion and elaborate on the other party’s assets in 
the other forum. Id. at *2. Here, however, this court has already heard substantial trial evidence 
regarding Dahua’s presence in California. Given that Dahua may currently be in the midst of 

                               4                                         
completing a sale to another company, see Ex. C to Mot. for Leave to Register This Court’s Am. 
J. in Cal. [Doc. No. 227-1], this court finds further delay to require more specific evidence as to 
those assets unwarranted.                                                 
    This court GRANTS Zhang’s Request for Issuance of Writ of Execution [Doc. No. 218] 

and Motion for Leave to Register this Court’s Amended Judgment in [the Central District of] 
California [Doc. No. 227].                                                
    IT IS SO ORDERED.                                                    
    May 30, 2024                /s/ Indira Talwani                       
                                United States District Judge             
















                               5

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                           
                   DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                             

DAHUA TECHNOLOGY USA INC.,     *                                         
                               *                                         
      Plaintiff and Counterclaim Defendant,  *                           
                               *                                         
          v.                   *    Civil Action No. 1:18-cv-11147-IT    
                               *                                         
FENG ZHANG,                    *                                         
                               *                                         
      Defendant and Counterclaim Plaintiff.  *                           


                     MEMORANDUM & ORDER                                  

                          March 12, 2024                                 

TALWANI, D.J.                                                             

    Dahua Technology USA Inc. (“Dahua”) brought this action against Feng Zhang to reform 
a severance term in an agreement (the “Release Agreement”) terminating Zhang’s executive-
level position at Dahua’s parent company, Zhejiang Dahua Technology Co., Ltd. (“Zhejiang”). 
Zhang counterclaimed that Dahua’s failure to pay him the stated severance amount breached the 
Release Agreement.                                                        
    Following remand of Zhang’s successful appeal of an order granting summary judgment 
to Dahua and an eleven-day bench trial, this court issued its Findings of Fact and Conclusions of 
Law [Doc. No. 194] (“Findings and Conclusions”). The court stated that it would enter judgment 
against Dahua on its claims for reformation of the Release Agreement and breach of the 
covenant of good faith and fair dealing. The court reserved judgment, however, as to Zhang’s 
breach of contract counterclaim pending resolution of a final question relating to the appropriate 
remedy. The court asked for briefing, based on certain of the court’s findings, as to whether the 
court “ha[s] authority to fashion an appropriate remedy as a matter of equity or must enforce the 
agreement as written as a matter of law.” Id. at 31–32. The court received the requested 
supplemental briefing, see Supp. Brief of Dahua Regarding the Court’s Question as to its 
Equitable Powers (“Dahua’s Supp. Br.”) [Doc. No. 196], Zhang’s Answer to the Court’s Post-
Trial Question (“Zhang’s Supp. Br.”) [Doc. No. 197]; Response of Dahua to Zhang’s Answer to 

the Court’s Post-Trial Question (“Dahua’s Reply Br.”) [Doc. No. 198], Zhang’s Reply to 
Dahua’s Supp. Brief (“Zhang’s Reply Br.”), and held a hearing on this narrow question.  
    Thereafter, and outside of the court’s briefing schedule, Dahua filed a Motion for the 
Court to Supplement its Conclusions of Law [Doc. No. 205] (the “Motion to Supplement”) and 
Memorandum in Support [Doc. No. 206], which Zhang opposed, Opposition to Dahua’s Motion 
[Doc. No. 207].                                                           
    For the reasons set below, the court denies Dahua’s Motion to Supplement [Doc. No. 
205] and concludes that the agreement must be enforced as written. Therefore, the court will 
enter judgment for Zhang and award damages on his breach of contract counterclaim. See Deft’s 
Answer & Counterclaim 7 [Doc. No. 17].                                    

    I.   BACKGROUND                                                      
    The factual findings and legal conclusions concerning the parties’ dispute are addressed 
in detail in the court’s Findings and Conclusions [Doc. No. 194] and incorporated herein. The 
court highlights the following findings that prompted the court’s question as to the proper 
remedy for Zhang’s breach of contract claim.                              
    First, Zhang and Dahua entered into a written contract, the Release Agreement. See Find. 
& Conc. 18, 21–22 [Doc. No. 194].                                         



                               2                                         
    Second, the Release Agreement provided for the termination of Zhang’s 2015 
Employment Agreement1 with Zhejiang and contained the following provision: “[i]n 
consideration for your execution, non-revocation and compliance with this [Release] Agreement, 
[Dahua] agrees to make monthly severance payments to you in the amount of $680,000 for 

sixteen (16) months following the offer termination Date (the ‘Severance Period’) . . . .” Find. & 
Conc. 17 [Doc. No. 194].                                                  
    Third, Zhang and Dahua had no agreement concerning Zhang’s separation of 
employment from Zhejiang or related severance prior to Zhang and Dahua entering into the 
written Release Agreement. See id. at 22–23. The “sticking points in the negotiations between 
the parties was . . . the termination of Zhang’s employment.” Id. at 27.  
    Fourth, Liquan Fu, Dahua’s Director and Zhejiang’s Chairman, was mistaken as to the 
severance term when he executed the Release Agreement on Dahua’s behalf without reading it, 
and Zhang was also mistaken, or, if not mistaken, knew or should have known that Dahua did 
not intend for the Release Agreement to provide severance payments in the amount of $680,000 

per month for sixteen months, when he executed the Release Agreement on his own behalf. See 
id. at 27–29.                                                             
    Finally, Dahua bore the risk of such mistake and that the risk was properly allocated to 
Dahua based on the totality of the circumstances. See id. at 29–31.2      



1 Capitalized terms not defined herein have the same meaning as in the Findings and Conclusions 
[Doc. No. 194].                                                           
2 Dahua’s characterization of the mistake as a “scrivener’s error,” see Dahua’s Supp. Br. 9 [Doc. 
No. 196], is not consistent with this court’s findings as to how the mistake in the severance term 
arose. Fu’s mistake followed Dahua and Zhejiang’s deliberate choices in negotiations: to 
contract around many of the protections and benefits Zhang had secured in his 2015 Employment 

                               3                                         
    II.  DISCUSSION                                                      
         A.   Contract Formation3                                        
    As set forth above, the parties entered into a written contract. See Find. & Conc. 18, 21–
22 [Doc. No. 194]. Dahua’s complaint sought reformation of that contract based on mutual 

mistake and Dahua never previously contended or presented evidence that the contract was void 
ab initio. Dahua now contends that no contract was formed because there was a mutual mistake 
as to the severance amount, and, consequently, there was no meeting of the minds. See Dahua 
Supp. Br. 4–5 [Doc. No. 196]. Dahua’s original position as to contract formation was correct, 
however, because whether a contract was formed is an objective standard under Massachusetts 
law.                                                                      
    “Although mutual assent is often misleadingly referred to as a ‘meeting of the minds,’ the 
formation of a valid contract under Massachusetts law requires objective, not subjective[,] 
intent.” Greene v. Ablon, 794 F.3d 133, 147 (1st Cir. 2015) (citing Nortek, Inc. v. Liberty Mut. 
Ins. Co., 65 Mass. App. Ct. 764, 772, 843 N.E. 2d 706 (2006)). “Courts determine that mutual 

assent, not on the basis of what goes on inside the parties’ heads, but rather on the basis of what 
they say and do.” Salem Laundry Co. v. New England Teamsters & Trucking Indus. Pension 
Fund, 829 F.2d 278, 280 (1st Cir. 1987). Intent is “what a reasonable man in the position of the 



Agreement with Zhejiang while leading Zhang to believe those protections would continue; to 
maintain secrecy even from Dahua’s team of attorneys as to Zhang’s salary; and to decline to 
have the final agreement translated into a language Fu could read or understand before signing 
the agreement. See Find. of Fact & Conc. of Law 4, 12–17, 27 [Doc. No. 194].  
3 Dahua states that it “is not asking the Court to amend or supplement any of the Court’s findings 
of fact, nor is Dahua asking the Court to amend any of its conclusions of law.” Mot. to 
Supplement 1, n.1 [Doc. No. 205]. Dahua nonetheless attempts to relitigate the court’s 
conclusions of law as to contract formation. See Dahua Supp. Br. 4–5 [Doc. No. 196]. 
                               4                                         
other party would conclude his objective manifestations to be.” Greene, 794 F.3d at 147 
(quotations omitted); Klauber v. VMware, Inc., 80 F.4th 1, 9–10 (1st Cir. 2023) (citing Greene in 
rejecting evidence of subjective intent).                                 
    Here, the parties’ objective manifestation of their intent was that they entered into a 

contract by signing the written Release Agreement. As this court has found already, Dahua 
worked with its counsel to draft the contract, its counsel asked Zhang to review the contract, and 
its Director and Zhang signed the contract. See Find. & Conc. 15–18 [Doc. No. 194]. Dahua now 
inappropriately conducts an inquiry into the subjective intent of the parties to inquire if there was 
a “meeting of the minds,” as opposed to what the parties said and did. Salem Laundry Co., 829 
F.2d at 280.                                                              
    The First Circuit’s decision in Greene v. Ablon, 794 F.3d 133 (1st Cir. 2015), supports 
this court’s conclusion. In Greene, a doctor sued the hospital that was his former employer and 
his co-author alleging violations of trademark and copyright infringement pertaining to a book 
that Greene co-authored while employed by the hospital. See id. at 140–41. The hospital filed a 

counterclaim alleging inter alia that the doctor had violated the hospital’s intellectual property 
policy, which had been incorporated into numerous employment agreements signed by Greene. 
See id. at 142. Greene, relying on numerous contract defenses, argued that the hospital’s policy 
did not apply. See id. As relevant here, Greene alleged that “a valid contract was not formed at 
all because there was no ‘meeting of the minds[,]’ [s]ince he did not know the IP policy existed.” 
Id. at 147. The Greene court rejected this argument, relying on the objective standard in 
Massachusetts for contract formation, and concluding that Greene manifested the objective intent 
to be bound because he signed employment agreements incorporating the intellectual property 
policy by reference. See id.                                              

                               5                                         
    Dahua argued at the post-trial hearing that Greene is distinguishable because the dispute 
here over the Release Agreement involves a material term. That distinction finds no support in 
Greene, which did not justify its enforcement of the intellectual property policy on the 
materiality of the term. Dahua also offers case law for the propositions that (1) a binding contract 

does not follow unless there is agreement as to all material terms, and (2) the severance amount 
is a material term in a severance agreement. See Dahua’s Supp. Br. 5 [Doc. No. 196]. But none 
of Dahua’s offered cases speak to the circumstance here, where there is a written agreement with 
no missing terms. Accordingly, Dahua’s new argument that no contract was formed fails.4 
         B.   Ambiguity                                                  
    In its Motion to Supplement [Doc. No. 205], Dahua argues that the court should now find 
the severance provision of the Release Agreement ambiguous. See Mem. ISO Mot. to Supp. 4–8 




4 Whether a contract that has been formed is voidable on the ground that there is no meeting of 
the mind presents a different question, but one that has previously been addressed by this court. 
A mutual mistake defense does not support reformation of the contract—as Dahua sought here—
but voiding the contract altogether:                                      
    “Where there has been a mistake between the parties as to the subject matter of a 
    contract, there has been no ‘meeting of the minds,’ and the contract is voidable at 
    the election of the party adversely affected.” LaFleur v. C.C. Pierce Co., 398 
    Mass. 254, 257–58, 496 N.E.2d 827 (1986). Because the result is no contract, 
    rather than a reformed contract, the elements are somewhat different [than for 
    reformation]. No prior oral agreement is needed. Instead, “[t]o assert a mutual 
    mistake defense, a party must show that (1) the contract contained a mistake when 
    it was made; (2) the mistake is shared by both parties; (3) the mistake relates to an 
    essential element of the bargain; and (4) the party raising the defense did not bear 
    the risk of mistake.” Dahua Tech., 988 F.3d at 539 (citing LaFleur, 496 N.E.2d at 
    830–31 and Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 152 (Am. Law Inst. 1981)) 
    (emphasis added).                                                    
Find. & Conc. 26 [Doc. No. 194]. As the court previously concluded, Dahua is not entitled to a 
mutual mistake defense and the resultant voiding of the contract because Dahua bore the risk of 
the mistake. See id. at 29–31.                                            
                               6                                         
[Doc. No. 206]. First, Dahua waived any argument of ambiguity long ago. Dahua did not raise 
ambiguity in its Answer to Amended Counterclaim [Doc. No. 19] or at any later stage of this 
proceeding, and expressly disclaimed such an argument as recently as its briefing in connection 
with this court’s post-trial question. In its Reply Brief [Doc. No. 198], Dahua asserted that 

Zhang’s citation to a case involving ambiguous language was not probative as “neither Dahua 
nor Zhang claim [ambiguity] here.” Dahua’s Reply Br. 2 [Doc. No. 198]. In light of Dahua’s 
express rejection of ambiguity, any such argument has been waived.        
    In any event, the severance provision is not ambiguous. The provision reads: “In 
consideration for your execution, non-revocation and compliance with this [Release] Agreement, 
[Dahua] agrees to make monthly severance payments to you in the amount of $680,000 for 
sixteen (16) months following the offer termination Date (the ‘Severance Period’) . . . .” Find. 
& Conc. 17 [Doc. No. 194]. Dahua argues that the language of the settlement provision is 
unusual and susceptible to at least two interpretations: one providing for sixteen monthly 
payments, each in the amount of $680,000, and one providing for a total severance amount of 

$680,000, divided into sixteen monthly payments. See Mem. ISO Mot. 4–6 [Doc. No. 206]. 
Dahua contends that the former—Zhang’s preferred reading—would be the correct interpretation 
only if the provision at issue read “[Dahua] agrees to make monthly severance payments to you 
in the amount of $680,000 [per month].” Id. at 7.                         
    Dahua’s arguments strain the contractual text and are otherwise unpersuasive. “[W]hen 
the language of a contract is clear, it alone determines the contract’s meaning.” James B. Nutter 
& Co. v. Estate of Murphy, 478 Mass. 664, 669, 88 N.E.3d 1133 (2018) (alteration in original). 
The provision as drafted states that Dahua will make “monthly severance payments to [Zhang] in 
the amount of $680,000,” and that these “monthly severance payments” will be made for the 

                               7                                         
“Severance Period” of “sixteen (16) months.” Doc. No. 1-1 at 2 (emphasis in original). Dahua’s 
reading would require the court to ignore the word “monthly” in “monthly severance payments.” 
But courts “interpret a contract so that every word is given effect,” DeWolfe v. Hingham Ctr., 
Ltd., 464 Mass. 795, 804, 985 N.E.2d 1187 (2013), and for that reason alone Dahua’s argument 

fails. Moreover, even if this court were to find the contract ambiguous, that ambiguity would be 
construed against the drafter—in this case Dahua. See Nadherny v. Roseland Prop. Co., Inc., 390 
F.3d 44, 49 (1st Cir. 2004).                                              
    Finally, the Restatement (Second) of Contracts does not lead to a different result. Dahua 
points to Section 155 of the Restatement for the proposition that “[i]n a borderline case a court 
may avoid the necessity of reforming the writing by viewing the issue as one of interpretation.” 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 155 cmt. b (1981) (quoted in Mem. ISO Mot. to Supp. 4 
[Doc. No. 206]). First, this is not a borderline case as the severance provision has a plain and 
unambiguous meaning. Second, comment b of Section 155 refers to situations where “both 
parties are mistaken with respect to the reduction to writing of a prior agreement,” id. (emphasis 

added), whereas this court has already found that “there was no prior agreement” between the 
parties concerning Zhang’s separation of employment from Zhejiang, see Find. & Conc. 24 
[Doc. No. 194].                                                           
    Given the lack of any contractual remedies, the court now considers whether there are 
any equitable theories to justify relief in favor of Dahua.               
         C.   Unjust Enrichment                                          
    In its post-trial brief, Dahua argues that Zhang’s receipt of $10.2 million under the 
Release Agreement beyond what Dahua “intended to offer him” would be “quintessential unjust 
enrichment.” See Dahua’s Supp. Br. 10–11 [Doc. No. 196] (citing Fernandes v. Havkin, 731 F. 

                               8                                         
Supp. 2d 103, 114 (D. Mass. 2010)). Dahua urges the court to use its equitable powers to impose 
a quasi-contract where Zhang conferred benefits to Dahua and Dahua has already compensated 
Zhang for such benefits—and the court need only determine whether this compensation was 
appropriate. See id. at 6–7.                                              

    However, “Massachusetts law does not allow litigants to override an express contract by 
arguing unjust enrichment.” Platten v. HG Bermuda Exempted Ltd., 437 F. 3d 118, 130 (1st Cir. 
2006). Dahua’s cited cases do not hold otherwise. In Fernandes v. Havkin, 731 F. Supp. 2d 103 
(D. Mass. 2010), the court denied the unjust enrichment claim after finding it “unnecessary to 
determine the relative degree of enrichment and detriment between plaintiff and defendant” 
because there was a “fully integrated and express contract” between the parties. Id. at 115. In 
Corcoran Mgmt. Co. v. Town of Framingham, 2003 WL 21960676 (Mass. Super. July 3, 2003), 
the court considered a claim of unjust enrichment due to the absence of an express contract. See 
id. at *8–9.                                                              
    Accordingly, the court finds a claim of unjust enrichment is unavailable here because 

there is a valid and enforceable contract between the parties.            
         D.   The Court’s Inherent Equitable Powers                      
    Finally, this court’s inherent equitable powers do not support rewriting the contract or 
otherwise granting Dahua relief. Under Massachusetts law, “a written agreement made from an 
arm’s-length deal can’t be undone just because one party later claims she thought the deal was 
something other than what the signed contract reduced to ink.” Guldseth v. Fam. Med. Assocs. 
LLC, 45 F.4th 526, 539 (1st Cir. 2022). Even when faced with indefinite contracts, “[t]he court 
may not rewrite the language of a claim to make sense of it.” Am. Med. Sys., Inc. v. Biolitec, 
Inc., 666 F. Supp. 2d 216, 223–24 (D. Mass. 2019). Here, Dahua is a sophisticated business 

                               9                                         
entity that entered into an arm’s length deal; its Director signed a contract that the company’s 
counsel had drafted; and it now asks the court to set the contract aside and impose the court’s 
vision of an equitable term. But courts “should not attempt to ‘accomplish by judicial fiat what [a 
party] neglected to achieve contractually.’” Gen. Hosp. Corp. v. Esoterix Genetic Labs., LLC, 16 

F.4th 304, 313 (1st Cir. 2021) (emphasis added) (citation omitted)).      
    Dahua contends that the court has “inherent flexibility” and “substantial equitable 
powers” to prevent the allegedly unjust result of an extra $10.2 million in compensation being 
awarded to Zhang. Dahua Supp. Br. 9 [Doc. No. 196]. However, in none of the cases that Dahua 
cites did a court exercise equitable powers to override an express and unambiguous contract so 
that it could impose a remedy when the pleading party was not entitled to reformation or 
rescission. For instance, Dahua quotes Demoulas v. Demoulas, 428 Mass. 555, 703 N.E.2d 1149 
(1998), for the proposition that “equitable remedies are flexible tools to be applied with a focus 
on fairness and justice.” Dahua’s Supp. Br. 9 (quoting Demoulas, 428 Mass. at 580). But the 
Demoulas court also listed circumstances where such relief would be appropriate: “a violation of 

fiduciary duty and fraud.” Demoulas, 428 Mass. at 581–82 (quotations omitted). Zhang did not 
violate any fiduciary duty that he owed to Dahua and Dahua does not allege or show that he 
committed any fraud. Dahua also cites PHL Variable Insurance Company v. The P. Bowie 2008 
Irrevocable Trust, 718 F.3d 1 (1st Cir. 2013), but in that case, the court imposed an equitable 
award of special damages under Rhode Island law only after concluding that the plaintiff did not 





                              10                                         
have an adequate remedy at law, id. at 11. In contrast, Dahua, the counterclaim defendant, is 
seeking to limit Zhang’s remedy at law.5                                  
    There are no special circumstances here that justify the court fashioning equitable relief 
to reform an express contract. Dahua points to Borden v. Paul Revere Life Insurance Company, 

935 F.2d 370 (1st Cir. 1990), where the First Circuit affirmed a district court’s exercise of 
equitable powers to rescind an express insurance policy contract. See id. at 377. However, 
Borden involved claims of material misrepresentation, and the district court turned to equity in 
that context. See id. at 376–77. Dahua does not allege—and it cannot—that Zhang made any 
misrepresentations in negotiations over the Release Agreement. In Kansas v. Nebraska, 574 U.S. 
445 (2015), the Supreme Court recognized a court’s flexibility to craft equitable remedies, id. at 
472, but its holding was limited to circumstances where the Supreme Court has original 
jurisdiction (disputes between two states) and the Kansas Court expressly stated that its role in 
such disputes “significantly differs from the one the Court undertakes in suits between private 
parties,” id. at 453—which is what this court faces.                      

    Finally, Dahua has not persuaded the court that an exercise of discretion under Section 
158 of the Restatement (Second) of Contracts is appropriate here. Section 158 states: 
    In any case governed by the rules stated in this Chapter [6 Mistake], if those rules 
    together with the rules stated in Chapter 16 [Remedies] will not avoid injustice, 
    the court may grant relief on such terms as justice requires including protection of 
    the parties’ reliance interests.                                     
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 158(2). Dahua has not demonstrated that payment of nearly 
$11 million would be an injustice sufficient to invoke this Restatement provision and has not 



5 Holmberg v. Ambrecht, 327 U.S. 392 (1946), involved a suit in equity over certain land rights, 
far removed from the breach of contract dispute before the court. See id. at 393. 
                              11                                         
suggested any remedy that would avoid injustice to Zhang and protect his reliance interests. As 
this court has already found, Zhejiang needed to prevent Zhang from revealing “significant” and 
serious product-related security issues until they were resolved, and until the company completed 
an acquisition. See Find. & Conc. 6, 13 n.8 [Doc. No. 194]. The Release Agreement Dahua 

obtained for Zhejiang prohibited Zhang from competing with the company, disparaging the 
company, disclosing confidential information, or making any claims based on his 2015 
Employment Agreement—and required him to comply with the Release Agreement in order to 
receive any Severance Payments. See id. at 16–17. Zhang complied with the terms of the Release 
Agreement and provided the benefit of the non-compete, non-disparagement, and other 
contractual terms to Dahua and Zhejiang. See id. at 31.                   
    Much like a party seeking restitution bears the burden of showing the “injustice of the 
[other party’s] enrichment” and its entitlement to said restitution, Metro. Life Ins. Co. v. Cotter, 
464 Mass. 623, 644, 984 N.E.2d 835 (2013), where Dahua seeks relief on grounds of injustice, it 
bears the burden of showing the injustice of Zhang’s enrichment and its entitlement to 

restitution. Dahua merely argues that Zhang could not have reasonably expected to receive 
nearly $11 million in severance payments, Dahua’s Supp. Br. 11 [Doc. No. 196], but ignores the 
evidence that both Dahua and Zhejiang received the benefit of Zhang’s performance of his 
obligations under the contract, and the absence of evidence that those benefits were not of 
substantial value to Dahua and Zhejiang.                                  
     The court thus rejects Dahua’s proposal to reduce Zhang’s payments for performance 
after he has already finished performance. Instead, the enforcement of the Severance Provision 
as written does not constitute injustice such that the court should craft an equitable remedy 
overriding the contract. See Armstrong v. Rohm & Haas Co., 349 F. Supp. 2d 71, 80 (D. Mass. 

                              12                                         
2004) (“The law strongly favors certainty and precision of contracts, even at the expense of 
occasional injustice, on the theory that a contrary rule would lead to even greater injustices.”). 
    The Massachusetts Court of Appeals’ decision in Torrao v. Cox, 26 Mass. App. Ct 247, 
525 N.E.2d 1349 (1988), relying on this Restatement provision is inapt because Torrao is 

materially different from the facts here. In Torrao, the Appeals Court considered a seller’s claim 
for reformation of a deed after the seller discovered that the final deed as negotiated by his 
counsel conveyed to the buyers more land than he had intended—or authorized his counsel to 
convey. See id. at 249–52. The Appeals Court invoked the Restatement in holding that the seller 
could not be bound to modifications he had not assented to, and ordered equitable relief, 
allowing the buyers to elect either to reformation of the deed or rescission of the purchase 
agreement. See id. at 252. Here, there was no agency problem as Dahua’s Director signed the 
agreement (and declined to review it), and Dahua as the agreement’s drafter bore the risk of 
mistake. More importantly, the Torrao court had the option of allowing rescission of the contract, 
which is not available here, where Dahua and Zhejiang have received the full benefit of Zhang’s 

performance of the contract.                                              
    Accordingly, Dahua has not offered any authority from which the court may fashion an 
equitable remedy to override express contract terms here.                 
    III.  CONCLUSION                                                     
For the foregoing reasons, Dahua’s Motion to Supplement the Court’s Findings of Fact and 
Conclusions of Law [Doc. No. 205] is DENIED.                              
    The court further finds that, where it is without the equitable authority to reform the 
parties’ Release Agreement, the terms of the Release Agreement control, including the severance 


                              13                                         
provision in its entirety. Accordingly, the court enters judgment in Zhang’s favor as to his breach 
of contract counterclaim.                                                 
    IT IS SO ORDERED.                                                    
    March 12, 2024              /s/ Indira Talwani                       
                                United States District Judge             





















                              14

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                           
                   DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                             

DAHUA TEHCHNOLOGY USA INC.,    *                                         
                               *                                         
      Plaintiff and Counterclaim Defendant,  *                           
                               *                                         
          v.                   *    Civil Action No. 1:18-cv-11147-IT    
                               *                                         
FENG ZHANG,                    *                                         
                               *                                         
      Defendant and Counterclaim Plaintiff.  *                           

            FINDINGS OF FACT AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW                      

                          October 21, 2022                               
TALWANI, D.J.                                                             
    Dahua Technology USA Inc. (“Dahua”), a subsidiary of Zhejiang Dahua Technology 
Co., Ltd. (“Zhejiang”), brought this action against Feng Zhang to reform an agreement 
terminating Zhang’s executive-level position at Zhejiang (the “Release Agreement”). Dahua 
alleged that either mutual or unilateral mistake warranted reformation of the severance amount 
provided by the Release Agreement and that Zhang’s attempt to enforce the mistaken term 
breached the contract’s implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. Zhang counterclaimed 
that Dahua’s failure to pay him the stated severance amount breached the Release Agreement.  
    The district court granted Dahua’s motion for summary judgment, denied Zhang’s cross-
motion for summary judgment, reformed the agreement, and entered judgment for Dahua. On 
appeal, the First Circuit affirmed the district court’s determination that Massachusetts rather than 
Virginia law applied, and the denial of Zhang’s motion for summary judgment, but reversed 
entry of summary judgment for Dahua. Dahua Tech. USA Inc. v. Feng Zhang, 988 F.3d 531 (1st 
Cir. 2021). The First Circuit found that, on the record before it, “there are at least three triable 
issues of fact: whether Dahua made a mistake (informing whether any mistake defense is viable), 
whether Zhang made a mistake (informing whether a mutual mistake defense is viable), and, if 
only Dahua was mistaken, whether Zhang knew or should have known of Dahua’s mistake 
(informing whether a unilateral mistake defense is viable).” Id. at 540-41. 
    On remand, the case was reassigned to this session. The court considered Zhang’s Motion 
to Amend to Add a Counterclaim [Doc. No. 27] against Zhejiang (which Zhang had filed before 

summary judgment briefing and Dahua had opposed) and denied the motion as untimely. Mem. 
& Order [Doc. No. 98]. Following an eleven-day bench trial1 and post-trial briefings and 
argument, the court makes the following findings of fact and conclusions of law.  
    I.  Findings of Fact                                                 
         A.  Zhang’s Position at Zhejiang                                
    Zhejiang is a publicly listed Chinese surveillance technology company with its 
headquarters in Hangzhou, China. Liquan Fu founded Zhejiang and serves as its Chairman. He is 
also the sole director of its subsidiary, Dahua.                          
    In 2015, Zhejiang recruited Feng (“Frank”) Zhang for an executive level position 

overseeing Zhejiang’s North American operations as “Chief Strategy Officer, Vice President and 
President of North American and Enterprise Sales.” Zhejiang initially offered Zhang an annual 
salary between $200,000 and $300,000 and some amount of stock appreciation, but Zhang 
negotiated for far better terms with several executives, including Fu and Lin (“Tim”) Wang, 
then-head of Zhejiang’s subsidiary Dahua. Zhang ultimately signed an employment agreement 
with Zhejiang (the “2015 Employment Agreement”), that provided for an annual base salary of 
$510,000, bonuses and incentives based on his “contribution, company performance and 


1 Under the Release Agreement, the parties waived their rights to a trial by jury and consented to 
a bench trial. Tr. Ex. 1, Release Agreement 5 [Doc. No. 49-1].            
company policy,” and a one-time grant of 100,000 shares of Zhejiang stock. The 2015 
Employment Agreement was terminable during its three-year term only for cause (and then still 
requiring base salary continuation for the remaining term of the contract), and contained no non-
compete restrictions, confidentiality requirements, or non-disparagement clauses. Pursuant to the 
2015 Employment Agreement, Zhang was employed by Zhejiang but was based in the United 

States and Dahua paid Zhang’s salary and made available to him the standard benefits offered to 
Dahua employees. Although the 2015 Employment Agreement stated that the agreement 
“represent[ed] the entire agreement between [Zhang] and Zhejiang,” Ex. 17, Offer Letter [Doc. 
No. 49-17], Wang openly noted during the negotiations that Dahua could only show his salary as 
“200 – 300K us dollars.”                                                  
    Zhang’s employment with Zhejiang began on January 1, 2016. In 2016, Dahua paid 
Zhang only $193,165.34 of his $510,000 annual salary. Assured by the signed contract that 
guaranteed him $510,000 per year, Zhang did not complain to management about the 
underpayment. Day 8, 41:25-42:4 (“we already signed the contract, it’s something there. It’s not 

going anywhere. Eventually they’re probably going to pay.”). Consistent with Zhang’s 
expectations, Zhang received the balance of his 2016 salary by February 2017. Around the same 
time, Zhang also received a $400,000 performance bonus for his work in 2016, totaling $910,000 
in compensation for the first year of the three-year contract.            
    Despite evidence that Zhejiang was experiencing negative growth in the North American 
market in 2017, Zhejiang did not communicate to Zhang any dissatisfaction with his 
performance. Day 8, 26:21-27:4; 45:5-21, 46:14-18, 47:14-21.2 As late as summer 2017, Zhang 
construed Zhejiang’s communications as affirming his performance. For example, in June 2017, 
Zhejiang informed Zhang that he had been nominated for enrollment in the company’s stock 
ownership plan, an incentive program that allocates a set amount of phantom stock to 
participants based on a combination of factors including the employee’s “past performance” and 

department contributions entitling them to any appreciation on the value of the stock over time. 
Through this program, Zhang was awarded the value of 3,000,000 Yuan of Zhejiang stock. 
Likewise, when Zhang traveled to the company headquarters in China for his semiannual review 
in July 2017, Zhejiang gave no indication that his termination was imminent. Following Zhang’s 
presentation to Zhejiang board members on his ongoing initiatives and strategic vision for 
expanding Zhejiang’s North American market share, Fu told Zhang to “carry out the plan” and 
Zhejiang CEO Kei Li instructed Zhang “to accelerate the merger acquisition, strategic initiative 
stuff.” Day 8, 35:18-36:5.                                                
    One such strategic initiative was Zhejiang’s planned acquisition of Lorex Technology 

Inc. (“Lorex”), referred to internally as Project Mohawk. Lorex had an existing retail business 
with significant revenue that Zhejiang was looking to capitalize on to develop a critical foothold 
in the retail consumer market for surveillance technology. Zhejiang considered the Lorex 
acquisition strategically important to remain competitive with its peers. Zhang began discussing 




2 Fu testified that Zhejiang did express to Zhang its dissatisfaction with his performance, see, 
e.g., Day 2, 27:24-28:10, but the court does not find Fu’s testimony persuasive where it was not 
supported by any documentary evidence of such communications, was devoid of details as to 
time or place, and did not address the bonuses that Zhang received or the invitation that he  
interview for the Dahua CEO position.                                     
Project Mohawk in 2016 and Zhang’s leadership driving the Lorex acquisition continued through 
July and August of 2017.                                                  
 B.  Zhejiang’s Preparations for Zhang’s Termination                     
    By the midway point of 2017, Fu and the Zhejiang board had decided to remove Zhang 
from the day-to-day management of Zhejiang’s North American business. Zhejiang was 

deliberate in how it approached Zhang’s termination and Fu involved others in Zhejiang 
leadership in developing the company’s termination strategy.              
    Zhejiang’s general counsel appointed in house attorney Haiyan Yue to liaise with outside 
counsel, Cathryn Le Regulski. While Yue had no employment law background, she was versed 
in the American legal system (having graduated from the University of Michigan School of Law 
and having passed the New York State Bar Exam) and spoke fluent English. Le Regulski was Of 
Counsel in DLA Piper’s Virginia office where she specialized in employment law. Yue and Le 
Regulski worked at the direction of Fu and Zhejiang leadership. They were not privy to internal 
Zhejiang deliberations and were provided only the information that Fu deemed necessary for 

them to execute their limited role. A third attorney involved in the termination preparation was 
Qiang Li, a DLA Piper partner based in Asia.                              
    Yue and Le Regulski collaborated on an internal strategy memo that outlined legal 
options for Zhang’s termination, the associated risks, and any available mitigation measures. 
Despite the strategy memo centering on the terms in Zhang’s 2015 Employment Agreement, the 
copy of the agreement provided to them had Zhang’s annual base salary redacted.  
    The version of the strategy memo entered into evidence was Yue’s draft, with Le 
Regulski’s additions marked with underlines and her deletions with a strike-out line. Tr. Ex. 127 
at 957. It read, in part, as follows:                                     
    According to Frank’s offer letter, the term of employment is 3 years. Typically, 
    when an employment agreement in the US provides for a specified term of 
    employment, the contract also specifies the events that permit an early termination 
    and the termination pay required in each such event. Frank’s offer letter states that 
    his employment can be “terminated by Dahua for cause” and, in that case, Dahua 
    will pay Frank’s full base salary for the remainder of the 3-year term. Dahua may 
    also terminate Frank’s employment if he engages in illegal conduct or company 
    misconduct (such as embezzlement or policy violations) and, in such event, 
    Dahua only needs to compensate Frank through the last day worked. Of course, 
    Frank may always elect to resign his employment. Therefore, unless Dahua has a 
    basis to terminate Frank for cause or due to illegal conduct or misconduct, tTo 
    terminate the employment contract earlier constitutes breach of contract and 
    Dahua will need to pay for Frank’s damages. The amount of damages would be 
    one that make[s] Frank whole if we did not breach it. Therefore, it would include 
    not only his compensation for 3 years, but also all the benefits, such as health and 
    retirement benefits, that he would have enjoyed had his employment not been 
    terminated, and any other actual damages that he suffered as a result of not being 
    employed for the promised period, the satisfactory feeling of having such a job, 
    the advantage of getting the next job while employed, etc.           
Id.                                                                       
    Among the risks posed by termination articulated in the strategy memo was Zhang 
bringing a claim for breach of contract and Zhang’s possible use of insider knowledge to 
disparage the company or “act as a whistleblower and blow the whistle on vulnerability of 
[Zhejiang] products or operations.” Id. at 957-58; see Ex. 12, internal email from Yue to Le 
Regulski [Doc. No. 49-12] (stating that new offer letter needs to include that Zhang will “keep 
confidential the information of the Company” and “agree that he will not hurt the Company in 
the future”). Specifically, the memo articulated a concern that Zhang could publicize certain 
serious product-related security issues the company had been concealing.3 Ultimately, Yue and 
Le Regulski concluded that the “[b]aseline of the severance package” would require: (1) salary, 
bonus and other benefits from the date of termination through the end of the three-year term and 


3 The court finds that this security issue (detailed in sealed testimony) was a significant issue that 
Zhejiang was able to keep secret until it was resolved.                   
(2) “[a]dditional compensation to entice him to release all claims against Dahua.” Tr. Ex. 127 at 
958-59 [Doc. No. 46-11]. Yue and Le Regulski did not weigh in as to the amount of such 
compensation and the strategy memo includes no information as to why Zhejiang wanted to 
terminate Zhang.                                                          
    On August 23, 2017, in further preparation for Zhang’s termination, Yue asked Le 

Regulski to “help [] draft a separation agreement with Frank Zhang.” Tr. Ex. 7, at 1024-25. On 
August 24, 2017, Qiang Li reported that Le Regulski would make herself available for Fu’s 
negotiation with Zhang and that DLA Piper would prepare a termination agreement for Yue’s 
review. He also suggested “a strategy call . . . to make sure we are on the same page re strategy 
and the full picture.” Id. The next day, Yue followed up with “some updates,” telling Li and Le 
Regulski that Fu and “the new head of American Region” would fly to Boston and speak with 
Frank privately. Id.                                                      
    On August 27, 2017, following their strategy call that morning, Le Regulski wrote to Yue 
that she “neglected to reiterate a strategy point . . . . In [Fu’s] discussion with Frank, it would be 

helpful for Frank to believe that the company has the basis to terminate his employment for 
misconduct due to his failure to follow corporate policies but, rather than go that route, we are 
willing to allow him to remain with the company in a different capacity.” Ex. 134 [Doc. No. 65-
3]. Le Regulski acknowledged that she didn’t know “how strong of a case the company has to 
terminate for misconduct, but I think we should try to take this position for now.” Id. She also 
advised Yue to “start collecting evidence on the types of actions that Frank has taken that we 
could use to support a termination for misconduct in the event Frank does not want to 
cooperate.” Id. Nothing in the record at trial suggests that Zhang had engaged in any misconduct. 
    Also on August 27, 2017, Le Regulski circulated a form consulting agreement to Yue and 
they exchanged comments. Later that night, Le Regulski sent Yue a draft separation agreement.4     
 C.  Zhang and Fu’s Conversation at the Hotel                            
    As planned, Fu traveled to Waltham to conduct the exit negotiations and oversee the 
subsequent transition in leadership. Other members of the Zhejiang team who traveled to 

Waltham to support Fu included Yue, another in house lawyer Bo Li, Wang (who by now was 
Zhejiang’s Vice Chairman), Finance Director Jason Zhu, HR Representative Lynette Lv, and 
incoming leader of North American operations William Chou. Fu continued to be supported by 
outside employment counsel Le Regulski (from Virginia) and Qiang Li (from Asia). 
    Just before boarding his flight from China and without revealing the purpose of his visit, 
Fu informed Zhang he was traveling to the Waltham office. Zhang met Fu when he arrived at the 
airport on the evening of August 27, 2017, and drove him to his hotel. During the drive, they 
chatted about their families, and Fu told Zhang that he was “considering asking . . . young guys 
to run the business.” Day 8, 51:9-17. But it was late, so they agreed to talk more in the morning. 





4 The draft separation agreement contained a term for the continuation of Zhang’s salary for an 
unstated number of months. Tr. Ex. 7 at 1037. The continuation of salary concept reflected what 
Yue and Le Regulski understood “under Massachusetts law, what should be owed to [Zhang]” 
because Yue had not yet “talked to the top management about their decision” regarding the 
severance amount. Day 4, 53:2-24. Le Regulski commented in a footnote to the separation 
benefits provision that “[t]his paragraph is currently drafted to provide a cash severance payment 
in the event [that] Frank declines to become a consultant. However, even if Frank decides to 
become a consultant, we should consider having Frank sign this separation agreement in addition 
to the consulting agreement so that Dahua can get the benefit of the release of claims but, in lieu 
of the cash severance payment, we will revise this section to have the consulting agreement serve 
as consideration for the release.” Ex. 7 at 1037 n.1.                     
    Zhang returned to Fu’s hotel the next morning to discuss the details of Fu’s planned 
changes to the company’s North American leadership.5 There, Fu informed Zhang that he 
wanted to transition Zhang to a different position within Zhejiang. He first asked Zhang if he 
would be interested in a “senior management” position at Zhejiang’s headquarters in China. 
Zhang declined, telling Fu that he did not want to move to China while his children were in 

school in the United States. Zhang understood Fu to be offering as an alternative that Zhang 
serve as a senior corporate advisor to “keep running Project Mohawk.” Day 9, 53:6-20. Fu also 
assured Zhang that in the new role “there’s other things [he] could help with” “in mainly [the] 
USA,” including helping the young person who would take over running Dahua. Id. at 53:7-23. 
Zhang told Fu he would be happy to take on this role, but first wanted to know how Zhejiang 
would resolve the remaining terms of the 2015 Employment Agreement. Fu told him, “we will 
follow whatever the agreement says” and Zhang responded “if he can take care of the agreement, 
I’m ok.” Day 8, 54:21, 55:2-3. Zhang also asked Fu about his outstanding interest in Zhejiang 
stock. Fu assured Zhang that they would “take care” of the shares of Zhejiang stock but gave no 

specifics. Day 9, 46:18-19.                                               
    Zhang asked what Fu would ask him to sign in connection with these changes, and Fu 
said that the company would “make sure you’re comfortable, treat you well.” Day 8, 56:5-6. 
Zhang “thanked him for that.” Id. at 55:22-56:6.                          



5 Fu and Zhang’s recollection of this conversation differed in numerous respects. Those 
differences were compounded by Fu conflating when different events occurred. For example, in 
describing the agreement purportedly reached that morning at the hotel, Fu referenced 
conversations that had purportedly occurred later that day in the office in Waltham, months later 
when Zhang travelled to China, and at some indeterminable “end.” Day 2, 45:6-7; id. at 47:8-10. 
Where the testimony directly conflicted, the court generally found Zhang’s version more 
credible.                                                                 
    When their discussion at the hotel concluded, Zhang believed that he had an agreement 
with Fu to transition within Zhejiang from his position as Chief Strategy Officer, Vice President 
and President of North American and Enterprise Sales to a senior corporate adviser role for a 
guaranteed two-year term, with a $240,000 annual salary in addition to his salary under the 2015 
Employment Agreement. In Zhang’s view, “we’re both very happy” because “[Fu] said he’s 

going to take care of the contract [and] I’m going to keep working with the company.” Day 9, 
55:14-19.6 Understanding the impetus for the transition to be, at least in part, Fu’s desire to move 
Zhang into a role dedicated to the company’s high priority strategic retail initiatives, Zhang did 
not consider the change to be a demotion.                                 
    The negotiation at the hotel, described above, was Zhang’s only substantive discussion 
with Fu concerning the termination of his 2015 Employment Agreement and the terms of a new 
agreement.                                                                
    Upon concluding their conversation at the hotel, Fu stepped away to make a phone call. 
The content of that call is not in the record. Upon his return, he told Zhang, “we’re all set.” Day 

8, 56:20-24. Zhang then drove Fu the short distance to the Waltham office where they spent the 
rest of the day.                                                          
 D.  Events at the Dahua Office                                          
    At the office, Yue presented Zhang and Fu with several sets of draft separation 
documents, all prepared exclusively in English. Fu cannot read English and did not have any of 
the separation documents translated into Mandarin, though he did sign off on all of them.  


6 At one point during his testimony, Zhang relayed the following conversation: “Mr. Fu asked 
me to work on headquarter [sic], I said no. He asked me to work on consultant. I said okay.” Day 
8, 62:1-2. The court understands the term “consultant” in context to mean someone providing 
expert advice, and not to mean an independent contractor.                 
    1.  The First Set of Documents Presented to Zhang                    
    Yue emailed Le Regulski her understanding of Zhang’s separation terms, presumably 
based on what Fu conveyed to Yue or someone else during the phone call from the hotel. She 
wrote “[i]t’s been decided: Frank will serve as a consultant. Dahua will pay him the remaining 
16 month salary plus a monthly consulting fee. The consulting period is 2 years.” Tr. Ex. 8 at 

1064. Le Regulski told Yue she would incorporate these points into the draft agreements. But the 
revised agreements did not fully incorporate Yue’s points (let alone what Fu had said to Zhang).  
    The draft consulting agreement Le Regulski had forwarded to Yue before the negotiation 
provided that Zhang would contribute consulting services “upon the request of the President of 
Dahua,” for a term to be filled in, but that the consulting arrangement could be terminated “for 
any reason or no reason upon thirty (30) days’ advance written notice.” Tr. Ex. 7 at 1028-33. 
After receiving the email from Yue, Le Regulski added a “twenty-four (24) month[]” term into 
the draft consulting agreement, but did not eliminate language permitting termination “for any 
reason or no reason.” Tr. Ex. 8 at 1081. She also did not add salary continuation to the separation 

agreement. Rather, as she had suggested in the footnote to the original draft agreement, she 
described the consideration for the separation agreement to be the consulting agreement.7 The 
separation agreement was thus drafted to terminate Zhang’s employment at Zhejiang, release 
Dahua and Zhejiang of liability, and bind Zhang to confidentiality and non-disparagement 
clauses, and in exchange give Zhang the opportunity to consult as an independent contractor on 
ad hoc projects for an hourly fee and on an at-will basis. Instead of an employment agreement for 
a two-year term with Zhejiang and continuation of his existing rights and benefits, the consulting 



7 Le Regulski explained to Yue later that day that she had been under the mistaken impression 
that severance would be paid out as the consulting fees.                  
agreement included no guarantee of work, or entitlement to any of the rights or employee 
benefits he had under the 2015 Employment Agreement.                      
    2.  Zhang’s Rejection of the First Written Offer                     
    Zhang believed that he and Fu had reached an agreement on the material terms of his role 
change within Zhejiang, and that Zhejiang would provide a written agreement reflecting those 

terms for him to sign. The terms of the proposed separation and consulting agreements prepared 
by Le Regulski and Yue and presented to Zhang at the office were entirely at odds with what 
Zhang understood Fu had offered him that morning. Rather than transferring Zhang to a new 
executive role at Zhejiang with additional salary and continuation of his employment benefits 
and protections, the separation and consulting agreements, if accepted by Zhang, would have 
ended his employment with Zhejiang entirely and left him with only a terminable at will outside 
consultant position with Dahua. Day 4, 28:1-5 (“Frank . . . read the agreements, and he pointed 
out the wording of ‘outside consultant.’ And he said to Mr. [Fu], he would rather be an inside 
consultant.”). Zhang was particularly unhappy about the “at-will” arrangement. Day 9, 58:5-25 

(Zhang “point[ed] out the at-will portion, which is supposed to be two years, senior corporate 
advisor employment contract, not at-will”), 59:1-5 (Zhang testified “[t]hat’s the moment I’m not 
very happy with the company, because what we discussed, agreed on, in the morning, is not 
reflected in the first version.”). Moreover, the documents failed to include the compensation Fu 
promised Zhang for his new role and to compensate him for his 2015 Employment Agreement.  
    When Zhang realized the proposed contracts fell far short of what Fu had discussed, 
Zhang rejected them, telling Yue to “[g]o sync up with Mr. Fu” because “[t]his is not what I 
discussed with Mr. Fu. And, also, this is not what Fu said, treat me well.” Day 8, 62:11-19; Day 
9, 58:5-25 (“This is not what I discussed with Mr. Fu in the morning at the hotel. Please sync up 
with him.”).                                                              
    Frustrated with what he viewed as bad faith bargaining, Zhang looked for leverage he 
could assert to regain footing in the negotiation. He spoke with HR director Lynette Lv and told 
her that he believed he could “publish books, business cases” based on his experience at 

Zhejiang to “make millions of dollars.” Day 8, 66:3-18. When Lv asked if he was serious, Zhang 
said “why not? As far as [I’m] not violating the confidentiality agreement, I should be fine” and 
only “if the company [can] prove it.” Id. at 66:20-25. These concerns hit on the same fears 
expressed in the strategy memo drafted in preparation for Zhang’s termination.  
    3.  Zhejiang’s Internal Deliberations and Preparation of New Offer Documents  
    After Zhang rejected the first written offer, members of the Zhejiang board deliberated 
over next steps. Terminating Zhang’s 2015 Employment Agreement was an essential point of 
their deliberations. Zhejiang’s board sought to do so in a way that imposed confidentiality and 
other restrictions on Zhang, left Zhang willing to “keep confidential the information of the 
company,” and disincentivized Zhang from “hurt[ing] the company in the future.”8 

    While Fu may have viewed the two year arrangement he had verbally offered Zhang to 
be necessary to induce Zhang to leave his leadership position at Zhejiang while still believing it 
was in his interest to protect the company, “[some] people objected to the [employee] 
arrangement.” Tr. Ex. 11 at 1271.                                         




8 But Zhejiang’s concerns about Zhang’s ability to harm the company were time limited. 
Zhejiang needed to prevent Zhang from revealing the security flaw before it was resolved and 
interfering with the Lorex acquisition closing within the next few months.  
    While Zhejiang leadership was debating these issues, Le Regulski prepared different 
versions of the agreements. In an email to Le Regulski, Yue wrote:        
         So let me repeat what we discussed over the phone just to make sure that 
    there is no misunderstanding:                                        
         1. Frank reviewed the separation agreement and he doesn’t like it.  
         2. He and the boss decided on the spot that he will remain an employee of 
         the Company, and his new title is senior corporate advisor      
         3. In the new offer letter, please make sure to include the following 
         provisions (and all others that you normally have in such type of 
         agreements);                                                    
              a) The original offer letter is terminated.                
              b) Keep confidential the information of the Company        
              c) Because he was the CEO before and he knew much of the inside 
              information of the Company, he needs to agree that he will not hurt 
              the Company in the future.                                 
Tr. Ex. 12 at 1312.                                                       
    Yue also told Le Regulski that “things are not certain” as to Zhang’s continuing 
employment, so they continued to work on two sets of contracts. Tr. Ex. 11 at 1271. In one email 
to Le Regulski Yue stated that she had “added the 16 month payment provision to the separation 
agreement.” Id. The email included no information as to the amounts of the payment or Zhang’s 
salary (under either the 2015 Employment Agreement or the new offer). At another point, “top 
management” sent Yue a revised separation benefits term for the separation agreement that 
provided for severance payments “in the amount of USD$680,000” and “the value of the 
appreciation of 100,000 shares of common stock of Zhejiang Dahua Technology Co. Ltd. from 
January 1, 2017 to August 28, 2017,” with “[p]ayment arrangement of the separation benefits . . . 
decided later by mutual agreement.” Tr. Ex. 25 at 1227; Compare Tr. Ex. 11 at 1279 with Ex. 69 
at 1628. But nothing in this communication suggested that the $680,000 had any relationship to 
Zhang’s salary, and this paragraph, with the “appreciation of 100,000 shares” and separate 
payment arrangements for the separation benefits, was not included in the release agreement.9 
    Ultimately, the Zhejiang board decided to offer Zhang a senior corporate advisor position 
at Dahua, contingent on Zhang’s termination of the 2015 Employment Agreement with Zhejiang 
and acceptance of the confidentiality and non-compete restrictions and releases presented in the 

earlier offer.                                                            
    Le Regulski advised Yue that to present the new offer to Zhang, the prepared agreements 
would need to be modified. Accordingly, in lieu of the consulting agreement and separation 
agreement, Le Regulski prepared a new employment agreement and a release agreement. Le 
Regulski’s draft of the new employment agreement provided that Zhang would hold the position 
of “Senior Corporate Advisor,” and described the role as “performing such duties as are assigned 
to you from time to time, subject to the oversight and direction of the President of Dahua or his 
designee.” See Tr. Ex. 48 at 1378, 1381-82. The agreement also included restrictions on 
information sharing and limitations on the solicitation of customers and employees. Her draft 

included no term of employment and expressly provided that the position would be at will, 
terminable without advance notice, with or without cause. It also had a blank for the salary 
amount.                                                                   
    The draft release agreement terminated Zhang’s 2015 Employment Agreement rather 
than terminating his employment at Zhejiang or Dahua altogether. It listed “monthly severance 
payments to [Zhang] in the amount of $_________ for sixteen (16) months following the 


9 At the advice of Zhejiang’s tax counsel, all references to Zhang’s interest in Zhejiang stock 
were ultimately removed from the agreements and were replaced with a waiver of his right to 
any interest in stock. Zhang and Fu entered into a separate oral agreement concerning the 
resolution of Zhang’s outstanding stock interests. See infra Section I(E). 
Separation Date . . . ,” subject to the same conditions and releases in the earlier separation 
agreement. Tr. Ex. 12 at 1313. As Le Regulski explained, “I typically prefer to pay over time . . . 
so that you can buy good behavior from him, such as nondisparagement.” Tr. Ex. 39 at 1227. 
Because Zhejiang did not disclose Zhang’s salary to Le Regulski (or Yue), Le Regulski did not 
calculate the monthly amounts to be paid under the Release Agreement and left the monthly 

payment amount blank in the version she sent to Yue.                      
    Further changes were made to Le Regulski’s drafts by Yue (or others on her team) before 
they were presented to Zhang. The final version of the new employment agreement (“2017 
Employment Agreement”) eliminated any reference to the position being “at-will,” and provided 
that “the term of employment is (2) years.” Tr. Ex. 13.10 The final version also had a modified 
reporting structure. Where the first offer had Zhang reporting to and “subject to the oversight and 
direction of the President of Dahua,” Tr. Ex. 48 at 1378, the final version had Zhang “subject to 
the oversight and direction of the sole director of the Company,” which was Fu. Tr. Ex. 13. This 
version also had the salary filled in, specifying an “initial salary” at the rate of “$10,000 

biweekly, which equates to $240,000 on an annualized basis.” Id.          
    The final version of the Release Agreement also had a few changes from the version Le 
Regulski sent to Yue, including the addition of a dollar amount for the separation payment. The 
final version provides: “[t]his letter agreement (the “Agreement”) memorializes the terms we 
have agreed to with respect to the termination of your Offer of Employment dated November 5, 
2015, with Dahua Technology USA Inc. (the “Company”) and its parent, Zhejiang Dahua 
Technology Co. Ltd. (“Parent”).” Tr. Ex. 1. It continues:                 


10 This two-year term did not include the robust protection against early termination contained in 
the 2015 Employment Agreement.                                            
    1. Payments. In consideration for your execution, non-revocation and compliance with 
    this Agreement, the Company agrees to make monthly severance payments to you in the 
    amount of $680,000 for sixteen (16) months following the offer termination Date (the 
    “Severance Period”), payable subject to standard payroll deductions and withholdings on 
    the Company’s ordinary payroll dates over the Severance Period, beginning no later than 
    the Company’s second payroll date that occurs after the Effective Date (as defined 
    below), provided the Company received the executed Agreement from you by such date, 
    with the remaining installments after that occurring on the Company’s regularly 
    scheduled payroll dates. Such payment can be accelerated upon your request, and you 
    will be responsible for any tax associated with the payment, including any tax required 
    under Section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, and the regulations and 
    other guidance thereunder and any state law of similar effect.       

Id. In addition to the payment provision, the final version contains: (i) a general release of all 
claims against Dahua and Zhejiang arising out of his employment, but excluding inter alia, “any 
claims for breach of [the Release] Agreement;” (ii) a non-competition clause applicable while 
Zhang is receiving severance payments that bars work with a Dahua or Zhejiang competitor 
doing business in the United States or China; (iii) a mutual non-disparagement clause; (iv) a 
confidentiality clause as to the “contents and all information pertaining to [the] negotiations” and 
the agreement;  (v) contingent separation benefits that require Zhang’s compliance with the 
agreement’s terms to receive and retain the severance payments; and (vi) acknowledgments that 
(a) the agreement “relinquish[es] any or all rights [Zhang] ha[d] or may have [had] with regard to 
the stocks of Parent or the Company as defined in the offer letter dated November 5, 2015” and 
constitutes a “waiver and release” of claims “to anything of value to which [Zhang] [was] 
already entitled” and that (b) “this Agreement is a full and accurate embodiment of the 
understanding between you and the Company, and that it supersedes any prior agreements or 
understandings made by the parties, including the Offer of Employment between you and Dahua 
dated November 5, 2015, which shall be terminated in all respects, but excluding the offer letter 
entered into by the parties of even date.” Id.                            
    Both documents expressly supersede the 2015 Employment Agreement and cross 
reference each other. Though drafted in two separate documents, Dahua considered the 
agreements to be integrated. See, e.g., Compl. [Doc. No. 1]; Tr. Ex. 15 (summarizing 
agreements’ terms “[a]fter confirming the two agreements are considered together . . .”). 
    4.  Execution of the Final Agreements                                

    After finalizing the Release Agreement and 2017 Employment Agreement, Yue brought 
them to Zhang and Fu.                                                     
    Yue asked Zhang to review the 2017 Employment Agreement “with [the Release 
Agreement] going together,” Day 8, 99:15-16, 101:2-13, and informed him he had the right to 
engage counsel, which he declined.                                        
    Following a ten to fifteen minute review, Fu and Zhang signed both agreements. Day 8, 
68:20-22, 92:11 (“Mr. Fu signed it next to me first. I signed it second.”). The agreements were 
drafted in English, and despite his inability to read or understand them, Fu signed the documents 
without having them translated.                                           

 E.  Zhang’s Employment as Senior Corporate Advisor                      
    Over the next few months, Dahua did not pay $680,000 per month as set forth in the 
Release Agreement but “continued to pay [Zhang] the same amount that had been paid under the 
prior [2015 employment] agreement . . . at the rate of USD $510,000 a year.” Day 9, 83:2-13. 
Beginning in September 2017, Zhang also began receiving a salary in the amount of $20,000 per 
month for his work as a Senior Corporate Advisor pursuant to his 2017 Employment Agreement.  
    In November 2017, Fu called Zhang and asked him to travel to China to collect a 
payment for the stock appreciation. Zhang then traveled to Zhejiang’s headquarters in China 
where he met with Fu at his office before Fu’s secretary “handed [Zhang a] bag of the money.” 
Day 8, 103:8-11. The bag contained the equivalent of $240,000 in Yuan, which Fu represented to 
Zhang was a cash payment for the amount owed in connection with the stock-related 
compensation promised in Zhang’s 2015 Employment Agreement.               
 F.  Zhang’s Separation from Dahua                                       
    Less than five months into Zhang’s two-year term as a Senior Corporate Advisor, Dahua 

terminated his employment. On January 10, 2018, Dahua’s VP of Human Resources Yong Ying 
informed Zhang by email that he was being terminated and enclosed a “Confidential Separation 
Agreement and Release” for Zhang’s consideration and signature. The proposed separation 
agreement sought the “terminat[ion] in all respects” of “the Offer of Employment between 
[Zhang] and Dahua dated August 28, 2017,” and a complete separation from Dahua. Tr. Ex. 23. 
It included a release of all claims against Dahua and Zhejiang, a new non-competition agreement 
barring any work with a Dahua or Zhejiang competitor doing business in the United States or 
China for two years, and a mutual non-disparagement clause. It also tied Dahua’s severance 
obligation to Zhang’s ongoing compliance with the agreement’s terms. Id. (“In consideration for 

[Zhang’s] execution, non-revocation, and compliance with this Agreement, the Company 
[offered] to make severance payments to [Zhang] in the amount of $910,000”). Zhang did not 
sign the separation agreement, reporting that his attorney would be reviewing and negotiating the 
terms of his separation, and “formally request[ed] the payment acceleration of the agreed to 
severance amount defined in the first term” of the 2017 Employment Agreement. Tr. Ex. 16, 
email from Zhang to Ying. On January 29, 2018, Zhang’s attorney formally rejected Dahua’s 
severance offer. She wrote:                                               
    We have had an opportunity to review the Confidential Separation Agreement the 
    Company proposed to Mr. Zhang on or about January 10, 2018 (“January 2018 
    Separation Agreement”). In connection with our review of that document, we have 
    also reviewed certain of Mr. Zhang’s prior agreements with the Company, 
    including, without limitation, two agreements dated August 28, 2017. 

    Based on our review, we have concluded that, pursuant to existing and enforceable 
    contracts between the parties, . . . the Company is already contractually obligated 
    to pay Mr. Zhang over $11,000,000; the Company has failed to honor its 
    contractual obligations to pay him certain amounts pursuant to these contracts[.] 

Tr. Ex. 18 at 1.                                                          
    Le Regulski responded in a letter dated February 5, 2018. Tr. Ex. 19. She wrote that 
Dahua had                                                                 
    just learned that there is a scrivener’s error in the Release Agreement, such that 
    the wording of the agreement with respect to the severance amount does not 
    comport with the intention of the parties. Specifically, the Release Agreement on 
    its face provides for a monthly severance payment of $680,000 for 16 months, 
    rather than what the parties intended, which was a monthly severance payment of 
    $42,000 for 16 months, totaling $680,000.                            
Id. at 1. She denied that Dahua had any obligation to Zhang under the Release Agreement 
over $680,000 and asked that the Release Agreement be reformed through amendment, 
which she provided for Zhang’s signature. Zhang’s counsel refused reformation on his 
behalf and a series of letter correspondence between counsel ensued with escalating 
contention, ultimately culminating in this action.                        
    The parties agree that since August 28, 2017, Dahua has paid Zhang $680,000 in 
severance in connection with the Release Agreement and $480,000 in salary promised in the 
2017 Employment Agreement.                                                
 II.  Conclusions of Law                                                 
    Dahua raises mistake both in its affirmative claim for reformation of the Release 
Agreement and in its defense to Zhang’s counterclaim for breach of the Release Agreement. The 
elements of the affirmative claim for reformation and the contract defense are similar, but not 
identical, and accordingly, the court addresses Dahua’s claims first and then Zhang’s 
counterclaim.                                                             
 A.  Dahua’ Claims                                                       
    1.  Reformation                                                      
    Reformation of a contract serves “to effectuate the agreement intended by the parties to a 

contract where the contract language fails to capture that agreement.” Caron v. Horace Mann Ins. 
Co., 466 Mass. 218, 223, 993 N.E.2d 708(2013); Polaroid Corp. v. Travelers Indem. Co., 414 
Mass. 747, 756, 610 N.E.2d 912, 917 (1993). “Central to this doctrine is the fundamental 
underpinning that the parties had reached an agreement on a point which they intended to 
enshrine in the written contract but which, for some reason, was mistakenly omitted from that 
written contract.” Caron, 466 Mass. at 223 (citing Sancta Maria Hosp. v. Cambridge, 369 Mass. 
586, 595-96, 341 N.E.2d 674 (1976) and German Am. Ins. Co. v. Davis, 131 Mass. 316, 317 
(1881)). “The mistake that [the plaintiff] must demonstrate—to a high degree of certainty—is not 
that the outcome of its agreement differed from its expectations, but rather that the contract 

language did not express the agreement as originally intended. OneBeacon Am. Ins. Co. v. 
Travelers Indem. Co. of IL, 465 F.3d 38, 42 (1st Cir. 2006); see also Restatement (Second) of 
Contracts § 155 cmt. a (“The province of reformation is to make a writing express the agreement 
that the parties intended it should”). To reform a contract, the court must therefore find “that the 
precise terms of a contract had been orally agreed upon between the parties, and that the written 
instrument afterwards signed fails to be, as it was intended, an execution of the previous 
agreement.” German Am., 131 Mass at 317.                                  
    Dahua contends that both parties entered into the Release Agreement with the 
understanding that Dahua would pay Zhang a total of $680,000 in severance—not $680,000 per 
month for sixteen months as written—and that reformation is therefore warranted based on 
mutual mistake. At a minimum, Dahua argues that the company mistakenly listed $680,000 as 
the monthly payment, and that even if Zhang was not mistaken, he knew or should have known it 
was a drafting mistake by Dahua and thus reformation of the severance amount based on 
unilateral mistake is available.                                          

    Although Dahua argues that there was a verbal agreement for $680,000 in severance, it 
points to no specific oral agreement. Negotiations between the parties at the Waltham office 
consisted only of presentation and rejections of written drafts, and accordingly, the court 
considers whether the discussions between Fu and Zhang at the hotel amounted to an oral 
agreement that Zhang and Dahua intended to enshrine in the written agreement.11 
    When Zhang and Fu concluded those discussions, Zhang believed Fu had proposed that 
Zhang would give up his role as Chief Strategy Officer and Vice President and President of 
North American and Enterprise Sales and would instead serve as a senior corporate advisor for 
Zhejiang, focusing on the parent company’s high priority retail-based strategic initiatives. It was 

in connection with this transition within Zhejiang that he would be paid an additional $240,000 
per year for two years while continuing to receive the salary and benefits for the remaining 
sixteen months of the contract. But Dahua does not seek to reform the Release Agreement and 
the 2017 Employment Agreement to conform to any such agreement of continued employment 
with Zhejiang.                                                            


11 Because a party seeking reformation of a contract “is not asking the court to interpret the 
contract but rather to change it to conform to the parties’ intent,” “the usual restrictions on 
contract interpretation, such as the parol evidence rule, do not apply to [the] court’s inquiry. 
OneBeacon Am. Ins., 465 F.3d at 41. Accordingly, even where a contract is unambiguous on its 
face, “[a] court still will accept extrinsic evidence in evaluating a claim that both parties to the 
contract intended it to say something else.” Id.                          
    The agreement Dahua seeks to enforce concerns Zhang’s release of claims and 
acceptance of new restrictions in connection with the termination of the 2015 Employment 
Agreement with Zhejiang and his new position with Dahua. But Zhang and Fu had no discussion 
about Zhang separating from Zhejiang or agreeing to these restrictions. Fu first suggested that 
Zhang continue working for Zhejiang at its headquarters in China, and then suggested that he 

serve as a senior corporate advisor. They did not discuss terminating Zhang’s employment with 
Zhejiang and did not discuss a Release Agreement at all. Where Zhang’s separation of 
employment from Zhejiang and the additional restrictions were not discussed at all, the court 
finds no prior oral agreement to which the Release Agreement can be reformed to reflect.  
    Dahua focuses on Fu’s promise that Zhang would continue to receive what he was 
entitled to under the 2015 Employment Agreement. Dahua translates this promise as equal to the 
remaining salary under that agreement, which totaled $680,000. But what Zhang was entitled to 
under the 2015 Employment Agreement was not just his salary, but a position with the parent 
company rather than its subsidiary, and 16 months of protection from termination of his 

employment (compensable with additional damages if he was terminated early).  
    In any event, if there was any prior oral agreement, the agreement would be with 
Zhejiang, not Dahua. While Fu served as both the sole director of Dahua and Chairman of 
Zhejiang, when he made his offer for Zhang to continue in a different role at Zhejiang, the offer 
was necessarily on behalf of the parent company, as the subsidiary would have no authority to 
offer Zhang a position with the parent. It may well be that Fu did not have authority to offer 
Zhang a different position at Zhejiang, where the Board had made the decision to terminate 
Zhang. But that possibility does not mean that Fu made an offer for a position at Dahua or that 
Zhang had agreed to end his employment with Zhejiang.12                   
    In sum, the court finds that there was no prior oral agreement with Dahua concerning 
Zhang’s separation of employment from Zhejiang. The court “will not decree reformation unless 
[it] is convinced that the parties expressed agreement and an intention to be bound in accordance 

with the terms that [it is] asked to establish and enforce.” Sancta Maria Hosp., 369 Mass. at 595. 
Accordingly, the court is unable to reform the written agreement to a prior agreement of the 
parties here and thus will enter judgment for Zhang and against Dahua on Dahua’s claim for 
reformation.                                                              
    2.  Covenant of Good Faith and Fair Dealing                          
    Dahua alleges that Zhang breached the Release Agreement’s implied covenant of good 
faith and fair dealing by seeking to enforce a term he knew or should have known was included 



12 Dahua and Zhejiang are not interchangeable. Only Dahua, and not Zhejiang, brought this suit, 
and Dahua opposed Zhang’s motion to amend his counterclaim to add Zhejiang as a 
counterdefendant. As the court explained in connection with that motion:  
    As early as 2015, Zhang either knew or should have known that Dahua was a 
    separate entity from its parent company as the 2015 employment agreement 
    makes this distinction clear. See Complaint, Exhibit 2 [#1-2] (stating that Zhang 
    would be employed by Zhejiang but paid by Dahua). Nor can Zhang plausibly 
    contend that he was reasonably proceeding in this action under the presumption 
    that Dahua was standing in for Zhejiang. For one, Dahua’s Complaint [#1] and 
    Zhang’s Answer [#18] acknowledge that Dahua and Zhejiang are separate entities 
    and specifically identify only Dahua as the party to this action. Moreover, 
    throughout discovery, Dahua made plain that Dahua was the party to this action 
    whereas Zhejiang was the party’s parent company. See Dahua Opp’n, Ex. C [#34-
    3] (Dahua noting, in its initial disclosures, that some of the disclosed individuals 
    worked for Dahua and others for Zhejiang); Dahua Opp’n, Exs. F and G [#34-6], 
    [#34-7] (Dahua objecting to Zhang’s definition of “Dahua and You” since it 
    included non-party Zhejiang).                                        
Mem. & Order 7 [Doc. No. 98].                                             
in error, thereby entitling Dahua to damages in the form of its attorney’s fees. But the implied 
covenant may not “be invoked to create rights and duties not otherwise provided for in the 
existing contractual relationship.” Uno Rests. V. Bos. Kenmore Realty Corp., 441 Mass. 376, 
385, 805 N.E.2d 957 (2004). Accordingly, the claim for attorney’s fees is denied. 
    The court notes further that Dahua’s claim is misplaced here. In every contract there is an 

implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing, which provides “that neither party shall do 
anything which will have the effect of destroying or injuring the right of the other party to 
receive the fruits of the contract.” Anthony’s Pier Four, Inc. v. HBC Associates, 411 Mass. 451, 
471, 583 N.E.2d 806  (1991). To demonstrate a breach of the covenant of good faith and fair 
dealing, one must show that a party to the contract did not deal “honestly and in good faith in 
both the performance and enforcement of the terms of their contract.” Hawthorne’s, Inc. v. 
Warrenton Realty, Inc., 414 Mass. 200, 211, 606 N.E.2d 908 (1993).        
    Here, there is no suggestion that Zhang failed to abide by the contract terms: he 
maintained the confidentiality of company information, did not compete, and performed his 

obligations as requested. Only after Dahua terminated Zhang without cause less than five months 
into the 2017 Employment Agreement’s two year term, did Zhang seek to enforce the Release 
Agreement. Dahua’s claim that Zhang violated his covenant of good faith and fair dealing after 
Dahua terminated him falls flat.                                          
 B.  Dahua’s Defense                                                     
    In his counterclaim, Zhang asks the court to find Dahua breached the Release Agreement 
by not paying him the $680,000 per month severance set forth in the document. Dahua raises 
affirmative defenses of mutual or unilateral mistake, contending that Dahua’s last offer – made 
in the form of the Release Agreement and the 2017 Employment Agreement – contained a 
mistake and that Zhang was either also mistaken or knew or should have known it was a mistake 
when he accepted the offer.                                               
    If successful, this defense does not support reformation of the contract but rescission. 
“Where there has been a mistake between the parties as to the subject matter of a contract, there 
has been no ‘meeting of the minds,’ and the contract is voidable at the election of the party 

adversely affected.” LaFleur v. C.C. Pierce Co., 398 Mass. 254, 257-58, 496 N.E.2d 827 (1986). 
Because the result is no contract, rather than a reformed contract, the elements are somewhat 
different. No prior oral agreement is needed. Instead, “[t]o assert a mutual mistake defense, a 
party must show that (1) the contract contained a mistake when it was made; (2) the mistake is 
shared by both parties; (3) the mistake relates to an essential element of the bargain; and (4) the 
party raising the defense did not bear the risk of mistake.” Dahua Tech., 988 F.3d at 539 (citing 
LaFleur, 496 N.E.2d at 830-31 and Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 152 (Am. Law Inst. 
1981)).13 For a unilateral mistake defense, a party must show “that (1) the contract contained a 
mistake when it was made; (2) one party made the mistake; (3) the mistake relates to an essential 

element of the bargain; (4) the party raising the defense did not bear the risk of mistake; and 
either (5)(a) the effect of the mistake makes the contract unconscionable or (5)(b) the party not 
raising the defense had reason to know of the mistake or caused the mistake.” Id. (citing Nissan 
Automobiles of Marlborough, Inc. v. Glick, 62 Mass. App. Ct. 302, 307, 816 N.E.2d 161 (2004) 
and Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 153 (Am. Law Inst. 1981)).        




13 Massachusetts law adopts the principles set out in the Restatement (Second) of Contracts for 
the recission of contracts. See Covich v. Chambers, 8 Mass. App. Ct. 740, 749, 397 N.E.2d 1115 
(1979).                                                                   
    Dahua has established that it made a mistake when setting forth the severance payment as 
$680,000 per month for sixteen months rather than $680,000 payable over sixteen months. The 
first set of documents Zhejiang prepared included no payment at all for Zhang’s separation 
(offering him only the opportunity to consult). The second set of documents contemplated 
compensation payable under the consulting agreement only. Le Regulski then acknowledged her 

misunderstanding and redrafted the documents to reflect Zhejiang’s intent to provide for 
severance payments for the balance of the term of the 2015 Employment Agreement. 
Contemporaneous e-mail communications between Yue and Le Regulski corroborate this view: 
while the draft did not include any dollar amounts, it did specify that Zhang would receive “the 
16 months of his salary as severance, regardless of whether he provides consulting services, and 
then he will get a separate consulting fee for his consulting services.” Tr. Ex. 11 at 1270.  
    The discrepancy between $10,880,000 (the amount in the agreement) and the initial zero 
dollar offer, with no discussions of intermediate offers, supports Dahua’s claim of mistake. It 
also is apparent how that mistake occurred. Le Regulski (and likely Yue) did not know the 

amount of Zhang’s salary in the 2015 Employment Agreement. Zhejiang management relayed to 
Yue the $680,000 figure, without explaining that this was the total amount, and not the monthly 
salary remaining under Zhang’s employment contract.                       
    Dahua has also established that the mistake was mutual or that Zhang had reason to know 
of the mistake. First, the sticking point in the negotiations between the parties was not the 
amount of severance pay but the termination of Zhang’s employment.14 While Zhang could have 



14 Any dispute about the Zhejiang stock was a nonissue. The parties had an unwritten agreement 
to take care of the outstanding stock compensation separately and through a cash transfer in 
China.                                                                    
anticipated that Dahua would sweeten its offer slightly to resolve the negotiations, Zhang had no 
reason to think that Dahua would increase the severance from zero to $10,880,000. Second, 
while the evidence supports Zhang’s claim that keeping him quiet while Zhejiang or Dahua 
closed the Lorex deal and resolved the matters around a security flaw benefitted Zhejiang and 
Dahua by more than that amount, it does not support the notion that Zhejiang and Dahua – which 

had a sizable team working hard to get what the company exactly what it wanted -- would have 
offered the large sum, rather than a much smaller amount, to buy Zhang’s silence and 
cooperation.                                                              
    Zhang’s further argument that he would not have accepted the deal for $680,000 because 
it amounted to less, rather than more, than he was entitled to under the 2015 Employment 
Agreement has some appeal. As the strategy memo had noted, absent misconduct (of which there 
was no evidence presented at trial) Zhang was entitled to not only the $680,000 if he was 
terminated during the contract term but also damages, including those he would suffer on the job 
market looking for work as a candidate who had been terminated from his last job. And Zhejiang 

had no non-disclosure or no-compete provisions in the 2015 Employment Agreement to limit 
Zhang’s post-termination activities. But, read together with the 2017 Employment Agreement, 
the answer is apparent: Dahua had convinced Zhang that he retained that protection in the form 
of a new employment agreement with a two-year term, plus additional compensation for his new 
role. This assurance was false, for without the protective language in the 2015 Employment 
Agreement, Dahua was free to terminate him, with payment of the balance of the two year term, 
but without additional damages, and Zhang was locked into a non-compete. And that is what 
Dahua did as soon as he no longer posed a risk to closing the Lorex deal. But Zhang’s mistaken 
belief that he had obtained meaningful protections in the 2017 Employment Agreement explains 
why it was not illogical for him to accept the Release with all its new restrictions for only the 
$680,000 that he would have been entitled to regardless. And if Zhang realized that the Release 
Agreement, as written, provided for $680,000 per month, he had reason to know of the mistake. 
While his silence and cooperation may well have been of significant value to Zhejiang, Zhang 
had reason to know, from his own prior experience dealing with Fu and Zhejiang, that the 

company would not jump to such a large number without first trying to buy his silence and 
cooperation for some lesser amount.                                       
    Dahua’s defense fails, however, because recission of a contract is available only to a 
contracting party that did not bear the risk of mistake. Covich, 8 Mass. App. Ct. at 749; Dahua 
Tech., 988 F.3d at 542.                                                   
    Under Massachusetts law, “[a] party bears the risk of a mistake when . . . he is aware, at 
the time the contract is made, that he has only limited knowledge with respect to the facts to 
which the mistake relates but treats his limited knowledge as sufficient . . . .” Greene, 794 F.3d at 
148 (1st Cir. 2015) (quoting Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 154); Dover Pool & Racquet 

Club, Inc. v. Brooking, 366 Mass. 629, 633, 322 N.E.2d 168 (1975) (where the contract has no 
risk assignment then the question is whether the party entered into the contract with “conscious 
ignorance or deliberate risk-taking”). And where the mistake relates to a term ascertainable from 
the written agreement, a party to a contract is “required to read or assume the risk of not reading” 
the contract. Greene, 794 F.3d at 146 (finding that despite “facial similarity between contracts,” 
employee assumed the risk of mistake where subsequent employment agreement referred to 
different set of policies than previous agreements). Moreover, a party bears the risk of a mistake 
when “the risk is allocated to him by the court on the ground that it is reasonable in the 
circumstances to do so.” Restatement (second) of Contracts § 154(c) (1981); see also Lawton v. 
Dracousis, 14 Mass.App.Ct. 164, 172-73, 437 N.E.2d 543 (1982) (“Considering all the 
circumstances of the controversy, especially the absence of any wrongdoing by [the party not 
raising the defense], we see no justification for allocating the risk of the mistake to [the party not 
raising the defense] by allowing [the party asserting the defense] to rescind the sale”); AECOM 
Tech. Servs. Inc. v. Mallinckrodt LLC, 117 F. Supp. 3d 98, 111 (D. Mass. 2015). (“[Recission’s] 

equitable character places it in the sound discretion of the court amid the total circumstances of 
the dispute”).                                                            
    Here, Dahua bore the risk of mistake in the Release Agreement. Dahua drafted the 
Release Agreement with a full panoply of lawyers. Fu left those lawyers operating without any 
information as to the dollar amounts to include in the agreement until the very end of the 
negotiations (as evidenced by the blanks relating to dollar amounts in the earlier drafts), and even 
then, management offered Yue no context or explanation for the number. It appears that Zhejiang 
was attempting to keep confidential from the attorneys (and perhaps others on the team) Zhang’s 
salary under the 2015 Employment Agreement. When management then told Yue to insert 

$680,000 in the contract (where the blank appeared for a monthly payment), she had no reason to 
know that management intended for her to enter 1/16 of that amount or even that $680,000 was 
the total salary remaining on the 2015 Employment Agreement. Moreover, Fu’s decision to then 
approve and sign the Release Agreement where it was presented to him in a language he could 
not read or understand—despite translation being an option—indicates he entered into the 
agreement with the kind of “deliberate risk taking” that results in assignment of the risk. Dover 
Pool & Racquet Club, 366 Mass. at 633. Accordingly, Dahua bore the risk of mistake as to the 
dollar amount in the Release Agreement.                                   
    The court finds further that the risk of mistake is properly allocated to Dahua based on 
the totality of circumstances. “Courts have traditionally applied discretion in affording relief by 
way of rescission, as they have with most equitable remedies.” Worcester Heritage Soc., Inc. v. 
Trussell, 31 Mass. App. Ct. 343, 346, 577 N.E.2d 1009 (1991); Browning-Ferris Indus., Inc. v. 
Casella Waste Mgmt. of Massachusetts, Inc., 79 Mass. App. Ct. 300, 313, 945 N.E.2d 964 

(2011) (Rescission’s “equitable character places it in the sound discretion of the court amid the 
total circumstances of the dispute”). Zhejiang and Dahua knew that Zhang was entitled to 
continued employment with job protection and damages for early termination under the 2015 
Employment Agreement. The team charged with terminating Zhang spent hours drafting 
documents to ensure that Zhang lost those protections and contract rights, replacing them with an 
arrangement that Zhang believed would continue those protections (albeit working for Dahua, 
rather than Zhejiang) but that Dahua knew would allow it to terminate Zhang a few months later. 
If the court were to allow Dahua to void the instrument, Dahua and Zhejiang would be unjustly 
enriched, where they have the benefit of a release for what would have been a wrongful 

termination under the 2015 Employment Agreement and Zhang’s silence, cooperation, and non-
competition under the new contracts. Zhang, in turn, would be harmed, where the practical result 
would be that his employment with Zhejiang will have been terminated without payment of 
damages due under the 2015 Employment Agreement and he will have provided the benefit of 
the non-compete and other contract terms to Dahua and Zhejiang without compensation. 
Accordingly, Dahua’s defense fails where at formation it bore the risk of mistake.  
    However, before entering judgment, the court seeks further briefing from the parties on 
the following question: Having found that there was no oral agreement in 2017 prior to the 
signed documents, that the parties were mutually mistaken as to the severance term in the 
Release Agreement,15 but that Dahua’s defense fails because Dahua bore the risk of such 
mistake, does the court have authority to fashion an appropriate remedy as a matter of equity or 
must the court enforce the agreement as written as a matter of law?       
 III.  Motion for Judgment on Partial Findings                           
    Zhang filed a Motion for Judgment on Partial Findings [Doc. No. 153] at the close of 

Dahua’s case. The court reserved judgment on that motion until trial was complete and post-trial 
motions briefed. In light of the court’s findings as to Dahua’s claims, this motion is now denied 
as moot.                                                                  
 IV.  Conclusion                                                         
    For the foregoing reasons, the court will enter judgment against Dahua on its claims for 
reformation and breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. The court reserves 
judgment as to Zhang’s breach of contract counterclaim against pending further briefing from the 
parties. The parties shall promptly confer and submit a proposed briefing schedule on the 
question posed by the court.16                                            

    IT IS SO ORDERED.                                                    
    October 21, 2022                   /s/ Indira Talwani                
                                       United States District Judge      





15 Or at a minimum, if Zhang was not mistaken that he knew or should have known that Dahua 
did not intend for the Release Agreement to provide severance in the amount of $680,000 per 
month for sixteen months.                                                 
16 The parties may include in their filing a joint request for mediation before a magistrate judge.

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                           
                   DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                             


 DAHUA TECHNOLOGY USA,                                                   
 INC.,                                                                   

          Plaintiff,                     No. 18-cv-11147-IT              

 v.                                                                      

 FENG ZHANG,                                                             

          Defendant.                                                     


                    MEMORANDUM AND ORDER                                 

                           May 26, 2021                                  

TALWANI, D.J.                                                             

    Before the court is Defendant and Counterclaim Plaintiff Feng Zhang’s Motion to Amend 
Counterclaim [#27]. Zhang seeks leave to amend his counterclaims to add a cause of action 
against Zhejiang Dahua Technology Co., Ltd. (“Zhejiang”), which is the parent company of the 
current Plaintiff and Counterclaim Defendant Dahua Technology USA, Inc. (“Dahua”). For the 
reasons set forth below, the court concludes that Zhang has failed to put forth any valid reason 
for amending his counterclaim to include a claim against Zhejiang where Zhang had the facts 
underlying his proposed claim against Zhejiang at the time he asserted his counterclaim against 
Dahua. Furthermore, the court concludes that leave to amend should not be granted since any 
claim for breach of contract against Zhejiang would be futile where the agreement at issue was 
only between Zhang and Dahua and Zhang has not adequately alleged a basis for the court to 
disregard the presumption of corporate separateness between the two entities. Accordingly, 
Zhang’s Motion to Amend Counterclaim [#27] is DENIED.                     
I.  RELEVANT BACKGROUND TO THE MOTION FOR LEAVE TO AMEND                 

    On November 9, 2015, Zhang signed an employment contract to serve as Zhejiang’s 
Chief Strategy Officer, Vice President, and President of North American and Enterprise Sales. 
See Dahua Compl., Ex. 2 (“2015 Employment Agreement”) [#1-2]. While the employment 
contract stated that it was with Zhejiang and was signed on behalf of Zhejiang, Zhang’s salary 
was to be paid for by Zhejiang’s American subsidiary, Dahua. Id. In the course of his 
employment in this position, Zhang reported to Liquan Fu, who was the Chairman and Chief 
Executive Officer of Zhejiang and also Dahua’s Sole Director. See Zahua Opp’n, Ex. A 89:16–
90:7 [#97-1].                                                             
    In August 2017, Zhang entered into an agreement, signed by Mr. Fu on behalf of Dahua, 
with respect to the termination of the 2015 Employment Agreement. See Dahua Compl., Ex. 1 
(“August 2017 Severance Agreement”) [#1-1]. The August 2017 Severance Agreement  

superseded the 2015 Employment Agreement and provided Zhang with cash compensation in 
return for several conditions, including a general release, an agreement not to compete, and an 
agreement of confidentiality.                                             
    The August 2017 Severance Agreement was the product of negotiation between Liquan 
Fu—the then Chairman of Zhejiang and Sole Director of Dahua—and Zhang. Zhang Mot. 
Amend 3 [#96]. Liquan Fu was assisted in the negotiations by Haiyan Yue, an attorney for 
Zhejiang. Id. In addition to the 2017 Severance Agreement, Zhang also signed a new 
employment agreement with Dahua that governed his new role as Senior Corporate Advisor at 
Dahua. See Dahua Compl., Ex. 3 (“August 2017 Employment Agreement”) [#1-3]. 
                               2                                         
    The amount of cash compensation provided in the August 2017 Severance Agreement is 
at the center of this dispute. Namely, the written agreement provided that Dahua would agree to 
make “monthly severance payments to [Zhang] in the amount of $680,000 for sixteen (16) 
months . . . .” August 2017 Severance Agreement [#1-1]. Dahua contends that this was a 
scrivener’s error and that the agreement between the parties was for 16 monthly payments of 

$42,500, for a total of $680,000, a difference of roughly $10 million. Dahua Compl. ¶ 14 [#1].   
    In November 2017, Zhang was directed to go to China to meet with Liquan Fu (Sole 
Director of Dahua and Chairman of Zhejiang) and the CEO of Zhejiang, Ke Li, to discuss 
Zhang’s role at Dahua. Zhang Mot. Amend 3 [#27]. Then, on January 10, 2018, Zhejiang and/or 
Dahua sought to terminate Zhang from his new role as Senior Corporate Advisor to Dahua and 
proposed a new severance agreement that would supersede the August 2017 Severance 
Agreement and provide Zhang with a $910,000 cash payment. See Zhejiang Opp’n, Ex. 2 
(“January 2018 Proposed Severance Agreement”) [#34-2]. The proposed severance agreement 
was delivered to Zhang by Ying Yong, Zhejiang’s Vice President of Human Resources. Zhang 

Mot. Amend 3 [#27]. Zhang refused to sign the agreement and, on January 29, 2018, submitted, 
though counsel, a demand letter for the full amount Zhang contends is due under the August 
2017 Severance Agreement (over $10 million). See Dahua Compl., Ex. 4 (“Demand Letter”) 
[#1-4].                                                                   
    In response, Dahua filed this action, seeking, inter alia, reformation of the August 2017 
Severance Agreement. See Dahua Compl. [#1]. Zhang counterclaimed and alleged that Dahua 
was in breach of that agreement. See Zhang Answer and Countercl. [#18]. In December 2018, 
the court extended the close of fact discovery to April 30, 2019. Elec. Order [#22]. 

                               3                                         
    On February 11, 2019, Plaintiff served an interrogatory on Dahua asking Dahua to 
describe the involvement of Mr. Li in negotiating the August 2017 severance agreement. See 
Dahua Opp’n, Ex. H [#34-8]. Dahua responded that Mr. Li was not involved in the negotiations. 
See Dahua Opp’n, Ex. I [#34-9]. Based on this representation, counsel for Zhang agreed not to 
take Mr. Li’s deposition. See Dahua Opp’n, Ex. J [#34-10].                

    On March 4, 2019, Liquan Fu was deposed. See Dahua Opp’n, Ex. J [#34-10]. 
Immediately following the deposition, Zhang’s counsel emailed Dahua to request a deposition of 
Mr. Li on the basis that Mr. Fu’s testimony “detailed Mr. Li was in fact involved [in the August 
2017 negotiation].” See id. Dahua’s counsel expressed disagreement with this characterization of 
Mr. Fu’s testimony and pointed to its interrogatory response stating that Mr. Li was not involved 
in the negotiation. Zhang Mot. Amend, Ex. C [#27-3].                      
    At the end of March 2019, Zhang’s counsel renewed his request to depose Mr. Li. Zhang 
Mot. Amend, Ex. D at 3 [#27-4]. Dahua’s counsel once again stated that the interrogatory 
response and Mr. Fu’s testimony established that Mr. Li could not provide relevant testimony. Id. 

at 1–2. Dahua also noted that, in any event, Mr. Li was employed by Zhejiang, not Dahua. Id. at 
2. Accordingly, Dahua informed Zhang that, since Mr. Li was employed by a non-party, “the 
only way that his deposition could be taken is through service of process in China.” Id. 
    On April 15, 2019, Zhang filed the pending motion requesting leave to amend the 
counterclaim to add Zhejiang as a Defendant. See Zhang Mot. Amend [#27]. Zhang explains that 
the motion was precipitated by Dahua’s refusal to produce Mr. Li for a deposition, which 
“dr[ew] a fictional line between the subsidiary and the parent where none ha[d] been drawn 


                               4                                         
before.” Id. at 1.1                                                       
II.  LEGAL STANDARD                                                      

    Under Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(a)(2), leave to amend shall be “freely given when justice so 
requires.” Foman v. Davis, 371 U.S. 178, 182 (1962) (citing Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(a)(2)). While the 
rule requires the court to liberally grant motions to amend, the rule is bounded in at least two 
important ways that are applicable here. First, leave to amend should not be granted where there 
has been “undue delay, bad faith or dilatory motive on the part of the movant.” Id. Second, leave 
to amend is not warranted where it would be futile, which is to say where the proposed claim 
“would fail to withstand a motion to dismiss pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6).” Crowl v. M. 
Chin Realty Trust, 607 F. Supp. 2d 245, 246 (D. Mass. 2009) (citing Hatch v. Dep’t for Children, 
Youth & Their Families, 274 F.3d 12, 19 (1st Cir. 2001)).                 
III.  DISCUSSION                                                          

    Zhang’s motion seeking leave to amend his counterclaim fails for at least two principal 
reasons. First, Zhang’s request to add Zhejiang as a party to this action is untimely where Zhang 
provides an insufficient basis for not asserting the counterclaim against Zhejiang at the outset of 
this litigation. Second, Zhang’s amendment is futile based upon the allegations in the proposed 


1 Shortly after Zhang filed the Motion to Amend [#27], fact discovery closed and the parties 
submitted cross-motions for summary judgment. See Zhang Mot. Summ. J. [#37]; Dahua Mot. 
Summ. J. [#47]. On January 9, 2020, the court granted Dahua’s Motion for Summary Judgment 
[#47] and entered Judgment [#78] in favor of Dahua. Zhang timely appealed. See Notice of 
Appeal [#79]. On February 17, 2021, the First Circuit vacated the judgment and remanded the 
case for further proceedings. See Court of Appeals Judgment [#83]. Following reassignment to 
this session, the parties agreed that the Motion to Amend [#27] remained ripe for adjudication. 
See Joint Status Report [#95].                                            
                               5                                         
amended counterclaim since Zhejiang is not a party to the 2017 Employment Agreement. The 
court addresses these bases for denying Zhang the requested relief in turn.  
          Timeliness                                                     
    Zhang’s Motion for Leave to Amend [#27] was filed on April 15, 2019, approximately 
seven months after Zhang filed his Answer and Counterclaim [#17], and fifteen days before the 

close of discovery. Where, as here, “a considerable period of time has passed between the filing 
of the [claim] and the motion to amend, courts have placed the burden upon the movant to show 
some valid reason for his neglect and delay.” Nikitine, 715 F.3d at 390 (quoting Hayes v. New 
Eng. Millwork Distribs., Inc., 602 F.2d 15, 19–20 (1st Cir. 1979)). Often, this burden is met 
where the movant can show “new allegations coming to light following discovery” or 
“previously unearthed evidence surfacing.” See Villanueva v. United States, 662 F.3d 124, 127 
(1st Cir. 2011).                                                          
    Here, the basis for Zhejiang’s liability on the breach of contract claim, as described by 
Zhang in the Proposed Amended Counterclaim [#27-1], turns on facts known to Zhang since the 
commencement of this proceeding, that is: that Zhejiang is Dahua’s parent company, that the 

severance agreement at issue was signed by Liquan Fu (who, in addition to being Sole Director 
of Dahua, is also Chairman of Zhejiang), and that Zhejiang has not paid Zhang the amounts that 
Zhang contends he is owed under the terms of the severance agreement. See Proposed Am. 
Countercl. 5–6 [#27-1]. Although Zhang possessed all the information he cites in support of his 
proposed claim against Zhejiang at the time he filed the counterclaim against Dahua, Zhang 
waited until two weeks prior to the close of fact discovery to seek leave to amend the 
counterclaim. Although Rule 15 prescribes a liberal policy towards amendments of the 
pleadings, where, as here, undue delay may result from a late amendment that is not based on 
                               6                                         
new facts, courts in this circuit have refused to allow the late amendment. See Villanueva v. 
United States, 662 F.3d 124, 127 (1st Cir. 2011) (affirming denial of request to amend where 
four months elapsed since complaint was filed and plaintiff had been “well aware of the facts 
underlying his claim . . . before he filed suit”); Nikitine v. Wilmington Tr. Co., 715 F.3d 388, 
390 (1st Cir. 2013) (affirming denial of request to amend where request brought nearly a year 

after complaint filed and where there were no new allegations that had come to light in the 
interim).                                                                 
    In his moving papers, Zhang impliedly argues that amendment may be timely to add a 
claim against Zhejiang where Zhejiang is, Zhang asserts, Dahua’s alter ego and Plaintiff only 
discovered that the two were separate entities (or were proceeding as separate entities) when 
Dahua refused to produce Mr. Li for a deposition. However, this argument is unpersuasive. As 
early as 2015, Zhang either knew or should have known that Dahua was a separate entity from its 
parent company as the 2015 employment agreement makes this distinction clear. See Complaint, 
Exhibit 2 [#1-2] (stating that Zhang would be employed by Zhejiang but paid by Dahua). Nor 

can Zhang plausibly contend that he was reasonably proceeding in this action under the 
presumption that Dahua was standing in for Zhejiang. For one, Dahua’s Complaint [#1] and 
Zhang’s Answer [#18] acknowledge that Dahua and Zhejiang are separate entities and 
specifically identify only Dahua as the party to this action. Moreover, throughout discovery, 
Dahua made plain that Dahua was the party to this action whereas Zhejiang was the party’s 
parent company. See Dahua Opp’n, Ex. C [#34-3] (Dahua noting, in its initial disclosures, that 
some of the disclosed individuals worked for Dahua and others for Zhejiang); Dahua Opp’n, Exs. 
F and G [#34-6], [#34-7] (Dahua objecting to Zhang’s definition of “Dahua and You” since it 
included non-party Zhejiang). Despite being on notice that Zhejiang was a non-party for as long 
                               7                                         
as these proceedings have been ongoing, Zhang only sought to add a claim against Zhejiang 
when Dahua refused to produce Mr. Li for a deposition. Whether Dahua’s refusal to produce an 
employee of its parent company for a deposition was proper is a question that could have been 
resolved on a motion to compel; it does not present an independent basis for asserting a cause of 
action against the parent company on facts known to Zhang since the beginning of this case.  

    For these reasons, the court concludes that Zhang has put forth no valid reason for 
waiting until seven months after his counterclaim was filed to seek leave to amend the 
counterclaim to assert a cause of action against Zhejiang. On the other side of the scale, where 
the motion to amend was brought two weeks prior to the close of fact discovery, expert 
discovery is now underway, and trial is set to commence in four months, the court finds that 
Zhang’s late addition of Zhejiang to this action will create an undue delay in these proceedings, 
constituting prejudice to the opposing party. Accordingly, leave to amend is improper under Fed. 
R. Civ. P. 15.                                                            
          Futility                                                       
    In addition to being untimely, Zhang’s proposed claim against Zhejiang is futile. Zhang 

alleges that Zhejiang is liable for breach of contract because Dahua and Zhejiang have failed to 
pay Zhang the payments conceived of in the 2017 Severance Agreement. See Proposed Am. 
Countercl. ¶ 16 [#27-1]. However, Zhejiang is not a party to that agreement; instead, the 
agreement plainly sets forth that the parties are Zhang and Dahua, with Liquan Fu signing for 
Dahua as Dahua’s Sole Director. See 2017 Severance Agreement [#1-1]. Likewise, the 
agreement is clear that Dahua, and not Zhejiang, was the party obligated to make Zhang the 
disputed payments. Id. ¶ 1 (“In consideration for your execution, non-revocation and compliance 
with this Agreement, the Company [defined in the previous line as Dahua] agrees to make 
                               8                                         
monthly severance payments to you in the amount of $680,000 for sixteen (16) months following 
the offer termination Date (the ‘Severance Period’).”                     
    Zhang’s contention that Zhejiang is nonetheless bound by the 2017 Settlement 
Agreement is based on the assertion that Zhejiang is liable for Dahua’s promises to Zhang since 
Dahua is Zhejiang’s alter ego or instrumentality. See Zhang Mot. Amend 5–7 [#96].2 However, 

because Dahua and Zhejiang are separate corporate entities, they are entitled to “a presumption 
of corporate separateness,” that may only be overcome with an “affirmative showing of 
compelling circumstances.” Egan v. Tenet Health Care, 193 F. Supp. 3d 73, 82 (D. Mass. 2016) 
(citing Platten v. HG Bermuda Exempted Ltd., 437 F.3d 118, 128 (1st Cir. 2006)). As a general 
matter, in Massachusetts, only two such circumstances call for piercing the corporate veil. First, 
“[a] veil may be pierced where the parent exercises ‘some form of pervasive control’ of the 
activities of the subsidiary ‘and there is some fraudulent or injurious consequence of the 


2 Zhang also argues that Dahua “admits that the August 28, 2017 severance agreement was 
actually between Zhang and Zhejiang.” Zhang Mot. Amend 5 [#27]. In support of this assertion, 
Zhang points to a proposed but unexecuted amendment to the 2017 Severance Agreement which 
was attached to Dahua’s counsel’s February 5, 2018 response to Zhang’s Demand Letter. See 
Dahua Compl., Ex. 5 (“Response Letter”) [#1-5]. Although the Response Letter refers to the 
2017 Severance Agreement as being between Zhang and Dahua, the unexecuted amendment has 
a signature line by Dahua, and both reference the termination of his then-employment (which 
was with Dahua), the unexecuted amendment defines the term “the Company” as used 
throughout the letter (including with regard to the 2017 Severance Agreement) as Zhejiang, not 
Dahua. Based on this draft, Zhang argues that “the August 28, 2017 severance agreement was 
actually between Zhang and Zhejiang.” Zhang Mot. Amend 5 [#27]. As an initial matter, in 
context, the draft amendment’s reference to Zhejiang appears to be a typographical error. 
Furthermore, Zhang’s argument that the severance agreement he signed was with Zhejiang is 
unpersuasive where even Zhang has, throughout this proceeding, asserted that Dahua, not 
Zhejiang, is the signatory to the agreement and is not now suggesting proceeding only as to 
Zhejiang.                                                                 
                               9                                         
intercorporate relationship.’” Scott v. NG U.S. 1, Inc., 450 Mass. 760, 767, 881 N.E.2d 1125, 
1132 (2008) (quoting My Bread Baking Co. v. Cumberland Farms, Inc., 353 Mass. 614, 619, 233 
N.E.2d 748, 752 (1968)). Alternatively, the veil may be pierced where “‘there is a confused 
intermingling of activity of two or more corporations engaged in a common enterprise with 
substantial disregard of the separate nature of the corporate entities, or serious ambiguity about 

the manner and capacity in which the various corporations and their respective representatives 
are acting.’” Id. (citing My Bread Baking, 353 Mass. at 619, 233 N.E.2d at 752).3 
    Here, the allegations in the proposed amended counterclaim, even accepted as true, fall 
well short of stating a claim for alter ego liability against Zhejiang.4 The only allegations that 
speak to the relationship between the two companies are Zhang’s assertions that Zhejiang is the 
parent company of Dahua, that Liquan Fu (the individual who signed the severance agreement 
on behalf of Dahua as its Sole Director) also serves as Chairman of Zhejiang, and that Zhang 


3 In considering whether one of these two situations are present, the Massachusetts Supreme 
Judicial Court has identified the following twelve factors that courts may look to as part of a 
“evaluative consideration” of whether corporate formalities should be set aside: 
    (1) common ownership; (2) pervasive control; (3) confused intermingling of 
    business assets; (4) thin capitalization; (5) nonobservance of corporate 
    formalities; (6) absence of corporate records; (7) no payment of dividends; (8) 
    insolvency at the time of the litigated transaction; (9) siphoning away of 
    corporation’s funds by dominant shareholder; (10) nonfunctioning of officers and 
    directors; (11) use of the corporation for transactions of the dominant 
    shareholders; and (12) use of the corporation in promoting fraud.    
Scott v. NG U.S. 1, Inc., 450 Mass. 760, 768, 881 N.E.2d 1125, 1132 (2008) (citing Attorney 
Gen. v. M.C.K., Inc., 432 Mass. 546, 555 n.19, 736 N.E.2d 373 (2000)).    
4 The Proposed Amended Counterclaim does not even assert that Zhejiang and Dahua are alter 
egos or instrumentalities of one another. This assertion only comes in the form of attorney 
argument in Zhang’s Motion to Amend 5–7 [#27].                            
                              10                                         
signed the severance agreement with Dahua in the presence of Zhejiang’s in-house counsel. See 
Proposed Am. Countercl. ¶¶ 2–4 [#27-1]. None of these assertions, taken separately or together, 
would support the legal conclusion that Zhejiang and Dahua are not entitled to the presumption 
of corporate separateness provided by Massachusetts law. Accordingly, because the 2017 
Severance Agreement is an agreement only between Zhang and Dahua and because Zhejiang and 

Dahua are separate corporate entities, Zhang’s proposed amended counterclaim fails to state a 
claim against Zhejiang for breach of contract relating to the 2017 Severance Agreement. 
IV.  CONCLUSION                                                           

    For the reasons set forth above, Zhang’s Motion to Amend Counterclaim [#27] is 
DENIED.                                                                   
    IT IS SO ORDERED.                                                    

Date: May 26, 2021                           /s/ Indira Talwani           
                                            United States District Judge 









                              11

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
              DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                              


              CIVIL ACTION NO. 18-11147-RWZ                          


              DAHUA TECHNOLOGY USA, INC.                             

                           v.                                        

                      FENG ZHANG                                     



                        ORDER                                        

                    February 19, 2020                                



ZOBEL, S.D.J.                                                             
Last month, the court allowed Dahua’s motion for summary judgment and 
directed the parties to jointly file a proposed judgment.  Docket # 68.  The parties now 
dispute Dahua’s entitlement to damages and, at the court’s request, have briefed the 
issue and provided independent proposed judgments.  Docket ## 75, 76.     
Dahua contends it is entitled to damages for Zhang’s breach of the implied 
covenant of good faith and fair dealing.  Because Zhang “threatened to sue Dahua to 
enforce the contract as-written, so Dahua was forced to file this declaratory judgment 
lawsuit,” Dahua claims it is entitled to reimbursement of the approximately $1.5 million 
in attorney’s fees and costs it incurred in connection with this litigation.  Docket # 75 at 
1.                                                                        
Dahua is entitled to a declaratory judgment of contract unenforceability, 
reformation of the terms of Zhang’s severance agreement, and judgment on Zhang’s 
Amended Counterclaim.  Additionally, Dahua is entitled to judgment that Zhang 
breached the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing.  However, though contract 
damages are recoverable for this claim, attorney’s fees do not qualify as such and, in 
any event, are not quantified by Dahua. See RFF Family P’ship, LP v. Ross, 814 F.3d 
520, 534-35 (1st Cir. 2016) (affirming district court’s denial of attorney fees damages, 
explaining Massachusetts’ third-party attorney fee exception under which “attorneys’ 

fees can be collected as part of damages when ‘tortious conduct . . . require[es] the 
victim of the tort to sue or defend against a third party in order to protect his rights’”) 
(quoting M.F. Roach Co. v. Town of Provincetown, 247 N.E.2d 377, 378 (Mass. 1969)); 
11 Corbin on Contracts § 57.9 (legal fees incurred in an action against the breaching 
party may not be recovered, though the expenses of litigating with a third party may be); 
MCLE, Inc., Damages, Interest, and Attorney Fees in Massachusetts Litigation, ch. 15 
(2015 ed.) (“Massachusetts courts have also recognized that the American Rule does 
not apply in cases where attorney fees are a form of compensatory damage because 
they are a natural and probable consequence of the tortious conduct at issue, 

unconnected with the fees incurred in bringing the claim.”) (emphasis added).  
Accordingly, Dahua is not eligible for damages.                           
Judgment shall enter in accordance with this order.                  

     February 19, 2020                       /s/ Rya W. Zobel        
      DATE                                RYA W. ZOBEL               
                          SENIOR UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE        

                           2

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
                  DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                              


                  CIVIL ACTION NO. 18-11147-RWZ                          


                  DAHUA TECHNOLOGY USA, INC.                             

                               v.                                        

                          FENG ZHANG                                     



               MEMORANDUM OF DECISION & ORDER                            

                         January 9, 2020                                 



ZOBEL, S.D.J.                                                             
    Plaintiff Dahua Technology USA, Inc. (“Dahua”) sued its former employee, 
defendant Feng (Frank) Zhang, seeking reformation of his severance agreement and a 
declaration of unenforceability.  Both parties contend that no genuine issue of material 
fact exists and have filed cross-motions for summary judgment.  Docket ## 37, 47. 
I.  Background1                                                          
 Dahua, a video surveillance equipment manufacturer, is based in Irvine, California 
but has an office in Massachusetts.  It is the U.S. subsidiary of a Chinese company, 
Zhejiang Dahua Technology Co., Ltd. (“Zhejiang”).                         
      a.  Initial employment arrangement                                 

1 The court takes these facts from the parties’ submitted statements of facts (Docket ## 46, 60) and 
deposition testimony.                                                     
                               1                                         
      On January 1, 2016, Zhang became Dahua’s Chief Strategy Officer, Vice 
President, and President of North American and Enterprise Sales and began working 
out of Dahua’s Boston-area office.  As set out in his November 9, 2015 Offer of 
Employment (“2015 employment agreement”), Zhang earned an annual salary of 

$510,000 and a one-time grant of 100,000 shares of Zhejiang’s common stock.  The 
2015 employment agreement guaranteed Zhang payment of his full base salary through 
a three-year term of employment, unless he was terminated for illegal or other 
misconduct.  It did not contain any release of claims, confidentiality, or non-competition 
clause.                                                                   
      b.  2017 employment negotiations and severance agreement           
    In August 2017, Dahua informed Zhang that his role at the company would 
change.  The chairman and CEO of the company, Liquan Fu, flew to Massachusetts on 
August 27 to deliver the news to Zhang.  The next day, August 28, Fu and Zhang 
negotiated the terms of his transition.  They agreed that Zhang would relinquish his 

Chief Strategy Officer role but would stay on as a consultant for two years at an annual 
salary of $240,000.  The parties further agree that Fu promised to “take care of” the 
remainder of the compensation owed to Zhang under the 2015 employment agreement 
(approximately $680,000) and cash out Zhang’s stock.  Though they dispute whether 
Zhang expected any additional severance, they agree that Zhang never asked for 
multiple millions of dollars.                                             
    As the negotiations progressed, Fu kept Dahua’s in-house counsel, Haiyan Yue, 
fully informed.  Yue in turn consulted with outside counsel Cathryn Le Regulski to 

                               2                                         
prepare documents memorializing Zhang’s transition.  At some point on August 28, Yue 
and Fu presented Zhang with draft separation and consulting agreements.  The 
separation agreement offered to pay Zhang $680,000 total, which aligned with the 
amount due under the 2015 employment agreement, and the consulting agreement 

categorized him as an at-will employee.  Zhang rejected these drafts.     
    Later that day, Fu and Yue presented Zhang with a new severance (rather than 
separation) agreement that provided payment of $680,000 per month for sixteen 
months, which could be accelerated upon his request.  The agreement also contained a 
general release of claims, a non-competition clause, and a confidentiality provision.  Fu 
and Yue also provided a new offer letter governing the consulting arrangement.  The 
severance agreement stated that it “shall be construed solely in accordance with the 
laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia,” whereas the offer letter contained a 
Massachusetts choice of law provision.  Zhang and Fu signed both documents, the 
severance agreement (“2017 severance agreement”) and the offer letter.    

      c.  Performance of 2017 severance agreement                        
    Dahua promptly initiated performance of both agreements, paying Zhang 
$62,500 per month ($42,500 per the severance agreement, calculated by dividing 
$680,000 over sixteen months, plus $20,000 per the offer letter, calculated by dividing 
$240,000 over twelve months) from September through December 2017.  Although the 
plain language of the 2017 severance agreement dictated payment of $680,000 per 
month, Zhang accepted this much lower amount without comment or complaint.   


                               3                                         
    On January 10, 2018, Dahua informed Zhang it wished to terminate his 
employment and offered him $910,000 in severance in exchange for signing a 
separation agreement.  On January 11, Zhang asked Dahua to accelerate payment of 
the amount outstanding under the 2017 severance agreement.  Zhang subsequently 

retained an attorney to review the separation agreement.  On January 29, Zhang’s 
attorney rejected the separation agreement and asserted that Dahua owed Zhang “over 
$11,000,000” under the 2017 severance agreement.  Docket # 49-18.         
    Dahua’s counsel responded on February 5, asserting the company had made a 
scrivener’s error in the 2017 severance agreement: instead of making a “monthly 
severance payment of $680,000 for 16 months” following his separation, Dahua had 
intended to pay Zhang $42,500 per month for sixteen months, for a total of $680,000.  
Docket # 49-19 (emphasis added).  Zhang maintains that there is no scrivener’s error in 
the 2017 severance agreement and that the company owes him at least $11 million.   
    On May 31, 2018, Dahua filed the instant suit for a declaration of unenforceability 

and reformation of the 2017 severance agreement to correct the alleged scrivener’s 
error.  The company also claims breach of the duty of good faith and fair dealing.  
Zhang counterclaimed for breach of contract.  The court denied Zhang’s motion to 
dismiss and the parties subsequently filed cross-motions for summary judgment, on 
which they were heard.                                                    
II.  Legal Standard                                                      
    Summary judgment is appropriate when the moving party “shows that there is no 
genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a 

                               4                                         
matter of law.”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a).  “An issue is ‘genuine’ for purposes of summary 
judgment if ‘the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the 
nonmoving party,’ and a ‘material fact’ is one which ‘might affect the outcome of the suit 
under the governing law.’”  Poulis-Minott v. Smith, 388 F.3d 354, 363 (1st Cir. 2004) 

(quoting Hayes v. Douglas Dynamics, Inc., 8 F.3d 88, 90 (1st Cir. 1993)).      
    “Cross-motions for summary judgment do not alter the basic Rule 56 standard, 
but rather simply require [the court] to determine whether either of the parties deserves 
judgment as a matter of law on facts that are not disputed.”  Ferguson v. Gen. Star 
Indem. Co., 582 F. Supp. 2d 91, 98 (D. Mass. 2008) (quoting Adria Int’l Grp., Inc. v. 
Ferré Dev., Inc., 241 F.3d 103, 107 (1st Cir. 2001)).  When confronting cross-motions 
for summary judgment, the court must “view each motion separately, drawing all 
inferences in favor of the nonmoving party.”  Fadili v. Deutsche Bank Nat’l Tr. Co., 772 
F.3d 951, 953 (1st Cir. 2014).                                            
III.  Applicable Law                                                     

    The parties disagree about which jurisdiction’s law applies to the 2017 
severance agreement.  The agreement itself selects Virginia law, a fact that Zhang 
contends should be dispositive.  Dahua, however, points to the absence of any 
connection by either party to Virginia, wherefore Massachusetts law should govern.  
    Sitting in diversity, the court applies the choice of law rules of Massachusetts.  
Levin v. Dalva Bros., Inc., 459 F.3d 68, 73 (1st Cir. 2006).  Massachusetts courts take a 
“functional choice-of-law approach that responds to the interests of the parties, the 
States involved, and the interstate system as a whole.”  Bushkin Assocs., Inc. v. 

                               5                                         
Raytheon Co., 473 N.E.2d 662, 668 (Mass. 1985).  “Where the parties have expressed 
a specific intent as to the governing law, Massachusetts courts will uphold the parties’ 
choice as long as the result is not contrary to public policy and as long as the 
designated State has some substantial relation to the contract.”  Steranko v. Inforex, 
Inc. 362 N.E.2d 222, 228 (Mass. App. Ct. 1977) (citation omitted).  To assess a state’s 
interest, courts consider: “(1) the place of contracting, (2) the place of negotiation of the 

contract, (3) the place of performance, (4) the location of the subject matter of the 
contract, and (5) the domicil [sic], residence, nationality, place of incorporation, and 
place of business of the parties.”  Bushkin, 473 N.E.2d at 669 (quoting Restatement 
(Second) of Conflict of Laws § 188(2) (1971)).                            
    Whereas Virginia is not the answer to any of these inquiries, Massachusetts 
figures into each.  The 2017 severance agreement was signed, negotiated, and 
performed in Massachusetts.  Likewise, the subject matter of the 2017 severance 
agreement was the payment of severance to Zhang, which the company furnished via 
its payroll system to Zhang in Massachusetts.  Finally, though Zhejiang is based in 

China and Dahua is based in California, Dahua has a place of business in  
Massachusetts and Zhang consistently worked out of this Massachusetts office.    
Virginia bears no relation to either party nor to their contractual arguments, while 
Massachusetts was the place of employment and the venue of the parties’ negotiations, 
as well as the execution and performance of the agreement in suit.  Therefore, the 


                               6                                         
stated choice of law in the 2017 severance agreement must yield to the law of 
Massachusetts.                                                            
IV.  Discussion                                                           
    Zhang argues that Dahua should be bound to the clear text of the severance 
agreement under which the company agreed to pay him $680,000 per month for sixteen 
months, and insists that the court cannot consider any parol evidence to probe the 

existence of a scrivener’s error or mistake.  Additionally, Zhang asserts that only a 
mutual—not a unilateral—mistake can support reformation of a contract, and that 
Dahua has not put forward any credible evidence suggesting a mutual mistake. 
    Dahua argues the inverse: that there is no genuine dispute of fact that a mutual 
mistake occurred, and the severance agreement should therefore be reformed to reflect 
the parties’ true intent.  In the alternative, Dahua contends that, at the very least, the 
company made a unilateral mistake, which likewise allows Dahua to avoid performance 
of the flawed severance agreement.                                        
    Dahua is correct on the law: parol evidence is relevant to assessing an allegation 

of mistake, and even a unilateral mistake can support avoidance of a contract.  Greene 
v. Ablon, 794 F.3d 133, 147 (1st Cir. 2015) (under Massachusetts law, a contract may 
be avoided based on unilateral mistake); Polaroid Corp. v. Travelers Indem. Co., 610 
N.E.2d 912, 917 (Mass. 1993) (under Massachusetts law, extrinsic evidence is 
admissible to evaluate claim of mistake).  “Reformation is an appropriate remedy for an 
agreement containing a mistake if the mistake is mutual or was made by one party 

                               7                                         
(unilateral) such that the other party knew or had reason to know of it.”  Nissan 
Automobiles of Marlborough, Inc. v. Glick, 816 N.E.2d 161, 165 (Mass. App. Ct. 2004).  
Reformation of a unilateral mistake must be supported by “full, clear and decisive proof.”  
Polaroid, 610 N.E.2d at 918.                                              
    Dahua claims that Zhang knew or should have known that there was a mistake in 
the 2017 severance agreement because he and Fu had agreed on the broad terms of 

his severance: $240,000 per year for two years for the consulting role, a payout of his 
stock, and a payout for the amount due under the 2015 employment agreement 
($680,000 total).  Dahua’s position is borne out in substantial testimonial and 
documentary evidence.  In his deposition, Fu testified that Zhang agreed to the 
$680,000 total figure, and that the discussion concerned whether the $680,000 sum 
should be paid as a single payment or in monthly installments.  Yue and Le Regulski 
likewise testified that Fu and Zhang had agreed on the $680,000 sum and that the 
company never intended to offer more.  Indeed, contemporaneous e-mail     
communications between Yue and Le Regulski corroborate this view: Zhang would 

receive “the 16 months of his salary as severance [amounting to 680,000 total], 
regardless of whether he provides consulting services, and then he will get a separate 
consulting fee for his consulting services.”  Docket # 49-10.             
    On the other hand, Zhang argues no mistake occurred because he knowingly 
accepted Dahua’s offer of $680,000 per month for sixteen months.  Zhang focuses on 
the undisputed fact that Zhang rejected Dahua’s offer of $680,000 total in its initial draft 

                               8                                         
separation agreement.  According to Zhang, any conversations and emails that predate 
this rejection are irrelevant.  While Dahua argues the rejection stemmed from the draft 
consulting agreement’s treatment of Zhang as an at-will employee, Zhang contends he 
rejected these initial drafts because they did not fairly compensate him for the value he 
provided to the company nor his acquiescence to the onerous release, confidentiality, 
and non-competition provisions that Dahua insisted on.  In Zhang’s view, therefore, he 

expected Dahua to come back to the table with a better offer, and so he was pleased to 
accept the $680,000 per month for sixteen months that Dahua offered in the next 
iteration of the agreement.                                               
    It strains credulity to think that a company would increase a severance offer 
sixteenfold above the amount fixed by an existing employment agreement.  Moreover, 
Zhang’s view is refuted by the evidence.  For example, after Zhang rejected the first 
separation agreement, Yue emailed Le Regulski and reported that “1. Frank reviewed 
the separation agreement and he doesn’t like it,” and “2. He [Frank] and the boss [Fu] 
decided on the spot that [Frank] will remain an employee of the Company, and his new 

title is senior corporate advisor.”  Docket # 49-12.  Le Regulski confirmed her 
understanding that Zhang “will sign an offer letter and release agreement (rather than 
separation agreement since he [sic] employment will not actually be terminated).”  Id.   
    Thus, Zhang is left relying on his own testimony, and even that is equivocal at 
best.  Though Zhang insists he rejected the initial draft separation agreement in part 
because the 2015 employment agreement guaranteed him $680,000 with no     

                               9                                         
confidentiality, non-compete or release strings attached, it is not clear from his 
testimony that he communicated this view to Fu.  Indeed, Zhang is clear only about 
three salient points from the negotiations.  First, Fu told Zhang that “he’s going to take 
care of the 2015 contract.”  Docket # 63-3 at 129:13-14.  Second, when presented with 
the draft consulting agreement, Zhang’s “only . . . comment” was to ask that the “at will” 
qualification be removed so that he would be guaranteed a two-year position with a 

$240,000 annual salary.  Id. at 143:12-18.  And finally, when presented with the draft 
separation agreement, Zhang “reject [sic] the contract. I told them I didn’t like it, both 
Ms. Yue sitting there, Mr. Fu standing. I told her, I said sync up with Mr. Fu, see what he 
promised me. And they said they would work on it. I just walk out the door.”  Id. at 
160:15-19.  Accordingly, Zhang’s testimony is consistent with Dahua’s position. 
    It is abundantly clear that Dahua only ever intended to provide $680,000 total in 
severance to Zhang, and that the company changed the draft separation agreement into 
a severance agreement to reflect its acquiescence to Zhang’s desire to stay on as an 
employee of the company while in a consulting capacity.  And irrespective of what 

thoughts animated Zhang’s mind during the negotiations, he cannot point to any 
evidence that the company was on notice of his supposed expectation for additional 
compensation.  In these circumstances, Zhang likely knew, and at the very least had 
reason to know, that the company was making a mistake when it offered $680,000 per 
month rather than $680,000 total.  Given this fact, Zhang’s failure to bring the mistake to 
plaintiff’s attention, his continued acceptance of monthly payments from Dahua, with his 

                              10                                         
subsequent insistence that the company owed him over $11 million (ultimately forcing 
Dahua’s hand to file this lawsuit), constitute breach of his duty of good faith and fair 
dealing with respect to the 2017 severance agreement.                     
V.  Conclusion                                                           
 Because there is no genuine dispute that a unilateral, if not mutual, mistake 
permeated the 2017 severance agreement, and Zhang accordingly breached his duty of 

good faith and fair dealing, Dahua’s motion for summary judgment (Docket # 47) is 
ALLOWED and Zhang’s motion for summary judgment (Docket # 37) is DENIED.  The 
2017 severance agreement shall be reformed to provide for a $680,000 total severance 
payment, in sixteen monthly installments of $42,500.  The parties are directed to jointly 
file a proposed judgment reflecting this reformation.                     

         January 9, 2020                         /s/ Rya W. Zobel        
          DATE                                RYA W. ZOBEL               
                              SENIOR UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE        








                              11