UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
                   DISTRICT OF CONNECTICUT                               
JAVIER DEL RIO, et al.,        )  CASE NO. 3:21-cv-1152 (KAD)            
     Plaintiffs,               )                                         
                               )                                         
     v.                        )                                         
                               )                                         
AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC., et al.,  )  SEPTEMBER 20, 2023                
     Defendants.               )                                         

                   MEMORANDUM OF DECISION                                
   RE: DEFENDANTS’ MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT (ECF NO. 114)             

Kari A. Dooley, United States District Judge:                             
    Plaintiffs  Javier  Del  Rio,  Colin  Meunier,  and  Aaron  Delaroche,  current  and  former 
warehouse workers employed at Amazon fulfillment centers located in Connecticut, have brought 
a putative class action on behalf of themselves and similarly situated warehouse workers against 
Defendants  Amazon.com  Services,  LLC,  Amazon.com.dedc,  LLC,  and  Amazon.com,  Inc. 
(“Defendants” or “Amazon”). Plaintiffs assert in the operative Amended Complaint two causes of 
action against Defendants: (1) a failure to pay straight time wages in violation of Conn. Gen. Stat. 
§§ 31-72; 31-71b et seq. and Conn. Agencies Regs. § 31-60-11; and (2) a failure to pay overtime 
wages in violation of Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 31-68; 31-76b(2)(A) et seq.1 Plaintiffs allege that 
Defendants violated Connecticut wage laws by requiring employees to go through a mandatory 
security screening process prior to leaving the facility without compensating them for time spent 
doing so. Defendants move for summary judgment on the ground that such time is not compensable 
as articulated in Integrity Staffing Sols., Inc. v. Busk, 574 U.S. 27 (2014). For the following reasons, 
the motion for summary judgment is GRANTED. (ECF No. 114)                 
Standard of Review                                                        

1 Plaintiff Del Rio does not bring a claim for overtime in Count Two.     
    The  standard  under  which  courts  review  motions  for  summary  judgment  is  well 
established. “The court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine 
dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” Fed. R. 
Civ. P. 56(a). A fact is “material” if it “might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing 

law,” while a dispute about a material fact is “genuine” if “the evidence is such that a reasonable 
jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party.” Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 
242, 248 (1986).                                                          
    Significantly, the inquiry being conducted by the court when reviewing a motion for 
summary judgment focuses on “whether there is the need for a trial — whether, in other words, 
there are any genuine factual issues that properly can be resolved only by a finder of fact because 
they may reasonably be resolved in favor of either party.” Id. at 250. As a result, the moving party 
satisfies his burden under Rule 56 “by showing . . . that there is an absence of evidence to support 
the nonmoving party’s case” at trial. PepsiCo, Inc. v. Coca-Cola Co., 315 F.3d 101, 105 (2d Cir. 
2002) (per curiam) (internal quotation marks omitted). Once the movant meets his burden, the 

nonmoving party “must set forth ‘specific facts’ demonstrating that there is ‘a genuine issue for 
trial.’” Wright v. Goord, 554 F.3d 255, 266 (2d Cir. 2009) (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e)). “[T]he 
party opposing summary judgment may not merely rest on the allegations or denials of his 
pleading” to establish the existence of a disputed fact. Wright, 554 F.3d at 266; accord Lujan v. 
Nat’l Wildlife Fed’n, 497 U.S. 871, 888 (1990). “[M]ere speculation or conjecture as to the true 
nature of the facts” will not suffice. Hicks v. Baines, 593 F.3d 159, 166 (2d Cir. 2010) (citations 
omitted; internal quotation marks omitted). Nor will wholly implausible claims or bald assertions 
that are unsupported by evidence. See Carey v. Crescenzi, 923 F.2d 18, 21 (2d Cir. 1991); Argus 
Inc. v. Eastman Kodak Co., 801 F.2d 38, 45 (2d Cir. 1986). “[T]here is no issue for trial unless 
there is sufficient evidence favoring the nonmoving party for a jury to return a verdict for that 
party. If the evidence is merely colorable, or is not significantly probative, summary judgment may 
be granted.” Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249–50 (citations omitted).            
    In determining whether there exists a genuine dispute as to a material fact, the Court is 

“required to resolve all ambiguities and draw all permissible factual inferences in favor of the party 
against whom summary judgment is sought.” Johnson v. Killian, 680 F.3d 234, 236 (2d Cir. 2012) 
(quoting Terry v. Ashcroft, 336 F.3d 128, 137 (2d Cir. 2003)). “In deciding a motion for summary 
judgment, the district court’s function is not to weigh the evidence or resolve issues of fact; it is 
confined to deciding whether a rational juror could find in favor of the non-moving party.” Lucente 
v. Int’l Bus. Machines Corp., 310 F.3d 243, 254 (2d Cir. 2002).           
Facts                                                                     
    The following facts are taken from Defendants’ Local Rule 56(a)(1) Statement of Material 
Facts (“Def. LRS,” ECF No. 118), Plaintiffs’ response thereto (“Pl. LRS,” ECF No. 120), and the 
parties’ exhibits. The facts are largely undisputed.                      

    Amazon2 owns and operates several fulfillment centers in and around Connecticut. Def. 
LRS at 2 ¶ 4. These fulfillment centers are warehouses that store items that are later sent out to 
fulfill individual customer orders. Def. LRS at 2 ¶ 5. Plaintiffs worked as Fulfillment Associates 
(Package Handlers) at Amazon warehouses in Windsor and North Haven, Connecticut. Def. LRS 
at 2 ¶ 4, 3 ¶¶ 7–9. During the relevant period, from April 2018 to March 15, 2020, Amazon required 
employees of the Windsor and North Haven fulfillment centers to go through a mandatory security 
screening process to enter and leave the warehouse. Def. LRS at 3 ¶ 10.   


2 Amazon.com.dedc, LLC merged into Amazon.com Services, Inc., and is now known as Amazon.com Services, 
LLC. Def. LRS at 2 ¶ 1. Amazon.com, Inc. is an indirect parent corporation of Amazon.com Services, LLC and did 
not employ Plaintiffs. Def. LRS at 2 ¶¶ 2–3.                              
    The security screening procedure is as follows. Employees swiped their security badge to 
unlock a turnstile and entered the warehouse through its sole entrance. Def. LRS at 3 ¶ 10. Upon 
entering, employees could store their personal items in a locker room and food in a breakroom 
located next to the locker room. Def. LRS at 3– 4 ¶ 12. Thereafter, employees would enter a 

security area wherein they would clock into their shift by swiping their security badge at a 
timeclock. Def. LRS at 4 ¶ 15. Employees would pass under a metal detector to enter or leave the 
secured area of the warehouse. Def. LRS at 4 ¶ 16. There were three available security screening 
processes available: Express Lanes, Divesting Tables, and X-Ray Machines. Def. LRS at 4 ¶ 17. 
Employees could choose among the processes depending on what items they wished to bring into 
the secured area of the warehouse. Def. LRS at 5 ¶¶ 22 Employees who chose to bring items such 
as bags and lunch boxes were required to put their items through an X-Ray Machine while they 
walked under the metal detector. Def. LRS at 5 ¶ 20. Employees who chose to bring “pocket” 
items such as keys, wallets, and cigarettes could put those items in a basket at the Divesting Table 
while they walked under the metal detector. Def. LRS at 4–5 ¶ 19. Employees without any items 

could use the Express Lane, in which they could walk under the metal detector without breaking 
stride. Def. LRS at 4 ¶ 18. If an employee set off an alarm during the security screening process, 
they were required to go to Secondary Screening, during which they removed all items from their 
possession and were “wanded” by a security guard. Def. LRS at 5 ¶ 21.     
    The Express Lane allowed an employee to pass through security without adding additional 
time to the process. Def. LRS at 5–6 ¶ 24. Delaroche chose to bring his keys through security 
because it was quicker and more convenient than storing them in the locker room. Def. LRS at 6 
¶ 27. Meunier also frequently brought his keys with him through security. Def LRS at 6 ¶ 28. Even 
the slowest screening process, the X-Ray Machine, took an average of ten seconds. Def. LRS at 7 
¶ 30. Employees typically passed through the security screening process in three minutes or less, 
and those who used the Express Lane could do so in seconds. Def. LRS at 7 ¶ 31. The longest time 
Meunier ever spent going through the security screening process, including Secondary Screening, 
was ten minutes. Def. LRS at 7 ¶ 32. His maximum time in a typical security screening process, 

excluding the Secondary Screening, was three to four minutes. Id. The longest time Delaroche ever 
spent going through the security screening process, including Secondary Screening, was twenty 
minutes, although he acknowledged that was not a typical amount of time and most of the time, 
the process was quick. Def. LRS at 8 ¶ 34. Even employees who went through Secondary 
Screening could pass through in less than a minute. Def. LRS at 7 ¶ 33.   
    The fulfillment centers also had breakrooms in the secured area, which would allow 
employees to take their break or eat in the warehouse without needing to pass through the security 
screening process to eat in the breakroom located outside the secured area, outside the building, or 
off premises. Def. LRS at 8 ¶ 36. The internal breakrooms contained vending machines and 
refrigerators for employees to store their food. Def. LRS at 8 ¶ 36. Timeclocks were also located 

nearby the internal breakrooms so that employees could clock in or out for their break. Def. LRS 
at 8 ¶¶ 35–36.                                                            
Discussion                                                                
    Defendants now seek summary judgment because the Supreme Court in Integrity Staffing 
held that time spent in security lines is not compensable under the federal Fair Labor Standards 
Act (“FLSA”), as amended by the Portal-to-Portal Act (“PTPA”), and because Connecticut wage 
laws were drafted to mirror the FLSA and the PTPA, the same result must be reached here. 
Alternatively, Defendants contend that even if time spent in security lines is compensable, the 
record evidence demonstrates that the time spent in this case was de minimis. Plaintiffs dispute the 
applicability of Integrity Staffing to their claims and challenge whether Connecticut law has 
codified or otherwise adopted the PTPA. The Court agrees with Defendants that the time spent in 
security lines is not compensable under Connecticut wage laws and therefore does not reach the 
latter argument.                                                          

    Congress enacted the FLSA in 1938 and thus established the federal minimum wage and 
overtime compensation requirements for each workweek. Pub. L. 75-718, 52 Stat. 1060 (1938); 
29 U.S.C. §§ 201 et seq. Notably, the FLSA did not define “work,” or “workweek,” leaving the 
Supreme Court to fill in the statutory gaps. In Tennessee Coal, Iron & R. Co v. Muscoda Local 
No. 123, 321 U.S. 590, 598 (1944), the Supreme Court defined “work” as “physical or mental 
exertion (whether burdensome or not) controlled or required by the  employer and pursued 
necessarily and primarily for the benefit of the employer and his business.” This became known 
as the “predominant benefit test.” See e.g., Reich v. S. New England Telecomms. Corp., 121 F.3d 
58, 64–65 (2d Cir. 1997). Similarly, the Supreme Court defined “workweek” to “include all time 
during which an employee is necessarily required to be on the employer’s premises, on duty or at 

a prescribed workplace.” Anderson v. Mt. Clemens Pottery Co., 328 U.S. 680, 690–91 (1946) 
(cleaned up). In separate cases, the Supreme Court held that time spent traveling between mine 
portals and underground work areas as well as time walking from timeclocks to work benches 
were compensable. Id. at 598; Mt. Clemens, 328 U.S. at 691–92.            
    An onslaught of litigation ensued by employees seeking backpay and damages for both 
preliminary and postliminary activities in the workplace. Integrity Staffing, 574 U.S. at 31–32. 
This prompted Congress to pass the PTPA in 1947. Id. at 32. The PTPA exempts employers from 
liability for the failure to pay an employee overtime for time spent “(1) walking, riding, or traveling 
to and from the actual place of performance of the principal activity or activities which such 
employee is employed to perform” and “(2) activities which are preliminary to or postliminary to 
said principal activity or activities.” 29 U.S.C. 254(a).                 
    In Integrity Staffing, the Supreme Court assessed whether “activities which are preliminary 
to or postliminary to said principal activity or activities” applied to Amazon warehouse workers 

who were required to go through antitheft security screenings before leaving the warehouse and 
held that such time was not compensable under the FLSA as amended by the PTPA. Integrity 
Staffing, 574 U.S. at 29, 35. The Supreme Court determined that the screenings were not the 
“principal activity” the employees were employed to perform; rather, they were employed “to 
retrieve products from warehouse shelves and package those products for shipment to Amazon 
customers.” Id. at 35. Moreover, the security screenings were not “integral and indispensable” to 
the employees’ duties because the screenings were not “an intrinsic element of retrieving products 
from warehouse shelves or packing them for shipment.” Id. Indeed, the employer could have done 
away with the screenings completely “without impairing the employees’ ability to complete their 
work.” Id.3 Finally, the Supreme Court rejected the predominant benefit test as an “overbroad” 

metric for defining “work.” Id.                                           
    Accordingly, the question for this Court is whether Connecticut law compels the same 
conclusion as the Supreme Court reached in Integrity Staffing under federal law.  
    Connecticut enacted its overtime statutes in 1967, 29 years after the FLSA and 20 years 
after the PTPA. See Conn. Pub. Act No. 493 (1967); Conn. Gen. Stat. § 31–76b et seq. Connecticut 


3 The Supreme Court distinguished precedent that held certain preliminary or postliminary conduct to be 
compensable time. For example, time spent by employees who worked at a battery plant showering and changing 
clothes after work was compensable because the chemicals they were exposed to were toxic, and thus, “the clothes-
changing and showering activities of the employees were indispensable to the performance of their productive work 
and integrally related thereto.” Id. at 34 (citing Steiner v. Mitchell, 350 U.S. 247, 249 (1956)). But, in contrast, the 
Supreme Court explained that it had held as not compensable time that poultry-plant employees spent waiting to don 
protective gear because that was “two steps removed from the productive activity on the assembly line.” Id. (citing 
IBP, Inc. v. Alvarez, 546 U.S. 21, 42 (2005)).                            
requires employers to pay employees “wages” for “hours worked.” Sarrazin v. Coastal, Inc., 311 
Conn. 581, 623 (2014) (McDonald, J., concurring); Conn Gen. Stat. § 31-71a(3) (defining wages). 
The statute defines “hours worked” as:                                    
    [A]ll time during which an employee is required by the employer to be on the employer’s 
    premises or to be on duty, or to be at the prescribed work place, and all time during which 
    an employee is employed or permitted to work, whether or not required to do so, provided 
    time allowed for meals shall be excluded unless the employee is required or permitted to 
    work. Such time includes, but shall not be limited to, the time when an employee is required 
    to wait on the premises while no work is provided by the employer.   

Conn. Gen. Stat. § 31-76b(2)(A). However, similar to the FLSA, the statute is silent about what 
constitutes “work,” a definition of which is “reasonably necessary to effectuate the statutory 
definition of ‘hours worked.’” See Belgada v. Hy’s Livery Serv., Inc., 220 Conn. App. 102, 120 
(2023). Where state law is “uncertain or ambiguous, the job of the federal courts is carefully to 
predict how the highest court of the state . . . would resolve the uncertainty or ambiguity.” First 
Invs. Corp. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 152 F.3d 162, 165 (2d Cir. 1998). The Court therefore looks 
to Connecticut state court decisions for guidance to determine what is “work” for the purposes of 
Connecticut’s wage law.                                                   
    The Appellate Court in Belgada, upon concluding that “work” as used in § 31-76b(2)(A) 
is ambiguous, turned to extratextual sources to discern the meaning of the word and found that the 
legislative  history  makes  clear  “that  the  purpose  of  the  [overtime  wage]  act  was  to  make 
Connecticut law coextensive with federal overtime law.” Belgada, 220 Conn. App. at 120; see also 
Williams v. General Nutrition Centers, Inc., 326 Conn. 651, 659 (2017) (“[General Statutes §] 31-
76c, which sets forth the overtime requirement, is nearly identical to the federal overtime statute,” 
29 U.S.C. § 207(a)(1)). And because Connecticut’s overtime scheme is analogous to the FLSA, 
Connecticut  “appellate  courts  customarily”  look  to  federal  statutes  and  precedent  when 
interpreting equivalent provisions, including how to interpret the word “work” in § 31-76b(2)(A). 
Belgada, 220 Conn. App. 121, 123–24 (holding “pursuant to § 31-76(b)(2)(A), a meal break is not 
an ‘hour worked’ unless the ‘employee is required or permitted to work’ during that break, and the 
test for what constitutes ‘work’ is the predominant benefit test” as defined by the United States 
Supreme Court); Roto-Rooter Servs. Co. v. Dept. of Labor, 219 Conn. 520, 528 n.8 (1991) 

(considering federal precedent on meaning and scope of FLSA exemption to interpret equivalent 
state law exemption); Williams, 326 Conn. at 569 (seeing “no reasoning to interpret [the relevant 
Connecticut  wage  statute]  differently  from  its  federal  counterpart”).  This  Court  therefore 
concludes, consistent with longstanding precedent from the Connecticut Supreme and Appellate 
Courts, that it is appropriate to turn to federal precedent, to include Integrity Staffing, when 
deciding whether the time Plaintiffs spent in security screenings is compensable under Connecticut 
wage laws.4                                                               
    Plaintiffs do not disagree that this Court may look to federal precedent to interpret the term 
“hours worked” as used in Connecticut’s statute but argue that the relevant precedent is the 


4 The Court recognizes that the Connecticut Appellate Court concluded that the appropriate test under Connecticut 
law for what constitutes “work” under § 31-76b(2)(A) is the federal “predominant benefit test.” Belgada, 220 Conn. 
App. at 124–25. And ordinarily, a federal district court is guided by state appellate courts on issues involving state 
law. Dibella v. Hopkins, 403 F.3d 102, 112 (2d Cir. 2005) (“Principally, we consider the language of the state 
intermediate appellate courts to be helpful indicators of how the state's highest court would rule. . . . Although we 
are not strictly bound by state intermediate appellate courts, rulings from such courts are a basis for ‘ascertaining 
state law which is not to be disregarded by a federal court unless it is convinced by other persuasive data that the 
highest court of the state would decide otherwise.’”). However, under the unique circumstances here, the Court does 
not follow Belgada’s conclusion that the federal “predominant benefit test” is the appropriate standard. In 
concluding that whether activity is “work” is determined by looking to the federal “predominant benefit test,” the 
Appellate Court relied upon federal cases that pre-dated the Supreme Court’s decision in Integrity Staffing. Those 
cases had held that “work” means “physical or mental exertion (whether burdensome or not) controlled or required 
by the employer and pursued necessarily and primarily for the benefit of the employer and his business.” See, e.g., 
Reich, 121 F.3d at 64 (citing Tennessee Coal, 321 U.S. at 598)) (emphasis added). However, this “predominant 
benefit test” was rejected by the Supreme Court as “overbroad” because the PTPA was designed specifically to 
exclude certain required activities, such as walking to a timeclock. Integrity Staffing, 574 U.S. at 36. The Belgada 
court neither discussed nor cited Integrity Staffing in its decision. A review of the state docket also reveals that the 
parties in Belgada likewise did not cite or discuss Integrity Staffing in their briefing at the Appellate Court or to the 
trial court. The Court therefore concludes that in light of the Appellate Court’s stated intention of following federal 
precedent, see Belgada, 220 Conn. App. at 121, the Connecticut Supreme Court’s well-established practice of 
looking to federal precedent to interpret Connecticut’s wage laws, and the legislature’s intent to bring Connecticut’s 
wage laws into alignment with federal overtime law, that had the Appellate Court considered Integrity Staffing’s 
holding regarding that which constitutes “work,” it would have followed Integrity Staffing.  
Supreme Court’s decision in Mt. Clemens because § 31-76b(2)(A) tracks that decision’s language. 
Compare Mt. Clemens, 328 U.S. at 690–91 (compensable time includes “all time during which an 
employee is necessarily required to be on the employer’s premises, on duty or at a prescribed 
workplace”); with Conn. Gen. Stat. § 31-76b(2)(A) (“Hours worked” includes “all time during 

which an employee is required to be on the employer’s premises or to be on duty, or to be at the 
prescribed workplace”). Plaintiffs also argue that the Connecticut legislature did not expressly 
incorporate the PTPA, rendering Integrity Staffing inapplicable, and that this Court should follow 
the reasoning of decisions out of the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals, the District of New Jersey, 
and Pennsylvania that held that time spent undergoing security screenings were compensable 
under their respective state wage laws. The Court addresses each argument in turn. 
    First, the relevant definition at issue is not “hours worked” but, rather, “work.” While the 
language of § 31-76b(2)(A) certainly tracks the language in Mt. Clemens, the purpose of “hours 
worked” cannot be effectuated without first defining what constitutes “work.” See Belgada, 220 
Conn. App. at 120. The Supreme Court explained that preliminary or postliminary work is not 

compensable “work” under the FLSA unless it is “integral and indispensable to the principal 
activities that an employee is employed to perform,” and such activity is integral and indispensable 
if it is “one with which the employee cannot dispense if he is to perform his principal activities.” 
Integrity Staffing, 574 U.S. at 33. See also Sarrazin, 311 Conn. at 598 (“To determine whether 
travel time constitutes compensable ‘work’ under the Portal-to-Portal Act, courts consider whether 
the employee’s commuting time is integral and indispensable to the principal work activity.”). 
Indeed, the Supreme Court explained that the PTPA “evinces Congress’ intent to repudiate” Mt. 
Clemens’s holding. Integrity Staffing, 574 U.S. at 36–37 (citing IBP, Inc. v. Alvarez, 546 U.S. 21, 
41 (2005)).                                                               
    Second, while it is true that the Connecticut legislature did not expressly incorporate the 
PTPA into Connecticut’s wage law, and while silence on the issue can indicate an intent on the 
part of the legislature to exclude or otherwise decline to incorporate federal law, here, the 
Connecticut Supreme Court has directed that when Connecticut wage laws are silent on a particular 

issue, courts should consider federal statutes and precedent on that issue. See Williams, 326 Conn. 
at 659. Further, Connecticut enacted its wage laws long after Congress had enacted both the FLSA 
and the PTPA, and the legislature did so to bring Connecticut’s laws into alignment with federal 
overtime laws. Belgada, 220 Conn. App. at 124. Thus, insofar as the PTPA was a federal overtime 
law when the Connecticut legislature enacted Connecticut’s wage laws, the Court concludes that 
the Connecticut legislature intended to incorporate both the FLSA and the PTPA when enacting 
its overtime scheme. And there is simply no extratextual indication that the legislature intended to 
exclude the PTPA.  “[W]hen the overlap between state and federal law is deliberate, as in this case, 
federal decisions are particularly persuasive.” Comm’n on Human Rights & Opportunities v. Savin 
Rock Condo. Ass’n, Inc., 273 Conn. 373, 386 (2005).                       

    The Court also finds persuasive the reasoning of several other courts that have reached the 
same conclusion under circumstances similar to those present here. See, e.g., Buero v. Amazon.com 
Servs., Inc., 370 Or. 502, 526–27 (2022) (holding that “Oregon statutes and administrative rules 
regarding what activities are compensable were intended to mirror federal law” as evidenced by 
the structure and text of such statutes and rules as well as the legislative and administrative history 
regarding their enactment and promulgation); Buero v. Amazon.com Servs., Inc., 61 F.4th 1031, 
1033 (9th Cir. 2023) (“Because the Oregon Supreme Court has squarely held that Oregon law 
aligns with federal law regarding what activities are compensable, . . . and because Plaintiff fails 
to allege that undergoing a mandatory security screening is ‘an integral an indispensable part’ of 
an employee’s principal activities, . . . her claims fails.”) (citations omitted); Hughes v. UPS Supply 
Chain  Solutions,  Inc.,  2023  WL  5444612,  at*3–*5  (Ky.  Aug.  24,  2023)  (Kentucky  statute 
“ambiguous in that it does not define ‘work,’ and contains no provision which addresses, either 
way, whether preliminary or postliminary activities constitute compensable work or time on the 

job,” but finding a connection between text of the PTPA and administrative regulations, and 
legislative  inaction  that  “demonstrates  that  the  legislature  has  ratified,  or  at  the  very  least 
acquiesced” to interpreting such regulations to exclude security screenings as noncompensable 
activities,  and  citing  to  Integrity  Staffing  for  such  proposition).  As  discussed  above,  the 
Connecticut Supreme and Appellate Courts have consistently held that Connecticut’s overtime 
laws are coextensive with federal overtime laws, thus supporting a legislative intent to incorporate 
the PTPA and the ability of this Court to consider the Supreme Court’s decision in Integrity 
Staffing as persuasive authority.5                                        
    The Court concludes therefore that the time Plaintiffs spent in security lines is not “work” 
compensable under Connecticut’s wage laws because it is not “indispensable to the performance 

of their productive work and integrally related thereto” their duties “of retrieving products from 


5 The Court is not persuaded by and readily distinguishes cases cited by Plaintiff as either arising where the state 
courts have declined to follow federal interpretations of the FLSA or had specified which aspects of federal law 
were included in state legislation (and by extension, excluding others). See e.g., In re Amazon.com, Inc., 255 A.3d 
191, 200–02 (Pa. 2021) (declining to engraft the PTPA onto Pennsylvania’s wage laws in light of legislative silence 
and prior decisions declining to follow federal interpretations “of similarly applicable provisions of the federal 
FLSA”); Roberts v. State, 253 Ariz. 259, 267 (2022) (holding that state law did not incorporate federal law when 
there was only “a single reference [to a FLSA provision] for a specific, limited purpose”); Amaya v. DGS 
Construction, LLC, 479 Md. 515, 525, 556–57, 559 (2022) (holding that the PTPA “has not been adopted or 
incorporated into Maryland law” because Maryland’s wage law does not refer to the PTPA, does not use phrases in 
the PTPA such as “principal activity,” “preliminary,” or “postliminary to,” and only refers to the FLSA as “the 
federal Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938” and not as amended by the PTPA). The Court also recognizes that the 
Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals has also held that the time that Amazon warehouse workers spent in security lines 
was compensable under Nevada law because “the Nevada legislature has chosen not to affirmatively adopt the 
[PTPA] anywhere in the Nevada state code,” and reached a similar conclusion under Arizona law. Busk v. Integrity 
Staffing Sols., Inc., 905 F.3d 387, 402–05 (6th Cir. 2018); Vaccaro v. Amazon.com.dedc, LLC, 2020 WL 3496973, at 
*6 (D.N.J. June 29, 2020) (same analysis but interpreting New Jersey law).   
warehouse shelves or packing them for shipment.” Integrity Staffing, 574 U.S. at 34–35 (quoting 
Steiner, 350 US. at 249). Defendants are therefore entitled to judgment as a matter of law.  
Conclusion                                                                
    Defendants’ Motion for Summary Judgment is GRANTED. (ECF No. 114) The Clerk of 

the Court is directed to enter judgment in favor of Defendants and to close this matter. 
    SO ORDERED at Bridgeport, Connecticut, this 20th day of September 2023. 
                               /s/ Kari A. Dooley                        
                             KARI A. DOOLEY                              
                             UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
                   DISTRICT OF CONNECTICUT                               

DEL RIO, et al.,               )  3:21-CV-01152 (KAD)                    
     Plaintiffs,               )                                         
                               )                                         
     v.                        )                                         
                               )                                         
AMAZON.COM SERVICES, LLC, et al.,  )  SEPTEMBER 30, 2022                 
     Defendants.               )                                         

MEMORANDUM OF DECISION RE: DEFENDANTS’ MOTION TO DISMISS (ECF            
    NO. 37) & PLAINTIFFS’ MOTION FOR LEAVE TO AMEND (ECF NO. 63)         

Kari A. Dooley, United States District Judge:                             
    Plaintiffs, Javier Del Rio, Colin Meunier, and Aaron Delaroche, bring this putative class 
action  against  Defendants,  Amazon.com  Services,  LLC,  Amazon.com.dedc,  LLC,  and 
Amazon.com, Inc. on behalf of themselves and similarly situated warehouse workers employed 
by Defendants. Plaintiffs assert by way of an Amended Complaint two causes of action against 
Defendants: (1) a failure to pay straight time wages in violation of Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 31-72; 31-
71b et seq. and Conn Agencies Regs. § 31-60-11; and (2) a failure to pay overtime wages in 
violation of Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 31-68; 31-76b(2)(A) et seq. The gravamen of Plaintiffs’ Amended 
Complaint is that Defendants required Plaintiffs to go through a mandatory security screening 
process prior to leaving Defendants’ Connecticut facilities but failed to pay Plaintiffs their hourly 
wage for the time it took to do so. Defendants moved to dismiss the Amended Complaint pursuant 
to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6), which Plaintiffs oppose. While the motion to dismiss was pending, 
Plaintiffs moved for leave to file a Second Amended Complaint, which Defendants oppose. For 
the reasons set forth below, Defendants’ motion to dismiss is GRANTED in part. (ECF No. 37) 
Plaintiffs’ motion for leave to amend is DENIED. (ECF No. 63)             
Standard of Review                                                        
    When deciding a motion to dismiss under Rule 12(b)(6), the Court “must accept as true the 
factual allegations in the complaint and draw all inferences in the plaintiff's favor.” Kinsey v. New 
York Times Co., 991 F.3d 171, 174 (2d Cir. 2021) (quotation marks, alterations, and citation 
omitted). To survive a motion to dismiss filed pursuant to Rule 12(b)(6), the “complaint must ‘state 
a claim to relief that is plausible on its face,’” setting forth “factual content that allows the court to 

draw the reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged.” Kolbasyuk 
v. Capital Mgmt. Servs., LP, 918 F.3d 236, 239 (2d Cir. 2019) (quoting Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 
550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007), and Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678 (2009)). “The assessment of 
whether a complaint's factual allegations plausibly give rise to an entitlement to relief ‘does not 
impose a probability requirement at the pleading stage; it simply calls for enough fact to raise a 
reasonable expectation that discovery will reveal evidence of illegal’ conduct.” Lynch v. City of 
New York, 952 F.3d 67, 75 (2d Cir. 2020) (quoting Twombly, 550 U.S. at 556). At this stage “the 
court's task is to assess the legal feasibility of the complaint; it is not to assess the weight of the 
evidence that might be offered on either side.” Id.                       

    In general, the Court's review on a motion to dismiss pursuant to Rule 12(b)(6) “is limited 
to the facts  as asserted within the four corners of the complaint. . . .” McCarthy v. Dun & 
Bradstreet Corp., 482 F.3d 184, 191 (2d Cir. 2007); Peter F. Gaito Architecture, LLC v. Simone 
Dev. Corp., 602 F.3d 57, 64 (2d Cir. 2010). “[I]f . . . matters outside the pleading are presented to 
and not excluded by the court, the motion shall be treated as one for summary judgment and 
disposed of as provided in [Fed. R. Civ. P.] 56, and all parties shall be given reasonable opportunity 
to present all material made pertinent to such a motion by Rule 56.” Glob. Network Commc'ns, 
Inc. v. New York, 458 F.3d 150, 154–55 (2d Cir. 2006); Carter v. Stanton, 405 U.S. 669, 671 
(1972) (per curiam); Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(d). “Federal courts have complete discretion to determine 
whether  or  not  to  accept  the  submission  of  any  material  beyond  the  pleadings  offered  in 
conjunction with a Rule 12(b)(6) motion. . . .” HB v. Monroe Woodbury Cent. Sch. Dist., No. 11-
CV-5881 CS, 2012 WL 4477552, at *4 (S.D.N.Y. 2012); Ware v. Associated Milk Producers, Inc., 
614 F.2d 413, 415 (5th Cir. 1980); Nutt v. Norwich Roman Cath. Diocese, 921 F. Supp. 66, 68 n. 
1 (D. Conn. 1995); Galvin v. Lloyd, 663 F. Supp. 1572, 1575 (D. Conn. 1987). 

Allegations                                                               
    The Court accepts as true the allegations in Plaintiffs’ Amended Complaint, which are 
summarized as follows.                                                    
    Defendant Amazon.com Services, LLC is a limited liability company organized and 
existing under the laws of the state of Delaware, headquartered in Seattle, Washington. (Amended 
Complaint, ECF No. 25 at ¶ 4) It is registered as a business with the Connecticut Secretary of State. 
(Id.) Defendant Amazon.com.dedc, LLC is a corporation organized and existing under the laws of 
the state of Delaware, headquartered in Seattle, Washington. (Id. at ¶ 5) Defendant Amazon.com, 
Inc. is a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state of Delaware, headquartered 

in Seattle, Washington. (Id. at ¶ 6) Defendants collectively own and operate approximately ten 
facilities in Connecticut, to include “fulfillment centers,” “delivery stations,” and “sorting centers.” 
(Id. at ¶ 7) Defendants employ warehouse workers at their Connecticut facilities, like Plaintiffs 
Del Rio, Meunier, and Delaroche, who are not exempt from mandatory security screening protocol. 
(Id. at ¶ 22)                                                             
    Plaintiff Del Rio is an individual residing in New Haven, Connecticut. (Id. at ¶ 8) Del Rio 
was  employed  by  Defendants  as  a  Packer  at  their  North  Haven,  Connecticut  facility  from 
November of 2020 to April of 2021. (Id.) Plaintiff Meunier is an individual residing in Royal Oak, 
Michigan. (Id. at ¶ 9) Meunier was employed by Defendants as a Stower and Picker Packer at their 
Windsor, Connecticut facility from May 29, 2018 until July 10, 2019. (Id.) Plaintiff Delaroche is 
an  individual  residing  in  Granby,  Connecticut.  (Id.  at  ¶  10)  Delaroche  was  employed  by 
Defendants as a Stower, Packer, Line Straightener, and Induct at their Windsor, Connecticut 
facility from November of 2019 until April of 2021. (Id.)                 
    In conjunction with their employment, Defendants required Plaintiffs and similarly situated 

non-exempt warehouse workers at their Connecticut facilities to go through a mandatory security 
screening process prior to leaving the facilities at the end of their shift, or for their meal break. (Id. 
at ¶ 24) As part of this screening process, Defendants required Plaintiffs to wait in lines leading 
up to a security screening area and to proceed through a metal detector. (Id. at ¶¶ 25; 27) If the 
metal detector’s alarm sounds, Defendants subjected Plaintiffs to individual searches conducted 
by a security guard. (Id. at ¶ 28) Defendants also required all bags and personal items carried by 
Plaintiffs to be individually searched by security guards. (Id. at ¶ 26) Defendants prohibited 
Plaintiffs from leaving the facility until they have successfully completed the security screening 
process, which routinely took between ten and twenty minutes.1 (Id. at ¶¶ 28–29) Moreover, 

Plaintiffs allege that Defendants’ mandatory security screening process resulted in an automatic 
thirty-minute deduction from their unpaid meal break.2 (Id. at ¶¶ 31–37)  
    Plaintiffs allege that Defendants agreed to compensate them and similarly situated non-
exempt warehouse workers at their Connecticut facilities based on an hourly rate for their time at 
work. (Id. at ¶ 38) Notwithstanding, Plaintiffs allege that Defendants have not paid them for the 
time elapsed between the conclusion of their shifts and the conclusion of the mandatory security 


1 Plaintiff alleges that, with delays, the mandatory security screening process “could take over [twenty] minutes.” (Id. 
at ¶ 29)                                                                  
2 Plaintiff alleges that the mandatory security screening process during the unpaid meal break period routinely took 
seven to ten minutes to complete, and sometimes took over ten minutes with delays. (Id. at ¶ 36) Plaintiffs were not 
able to eat their meals during the mandatory security screening process. (Id. at ¶ 37) 
screening process, or the time elapsed between the commencement of their unpaid meal period 
and the conclusion of the mandatory security screening process. (Id. at ¶¶ 30; 38) Plaintiffs further 
allege that, for some putative class members, a portion of the time spent in Defendants’ mandatory 
security screening process qualified as overtime.3 (Id. at ¶ 39)          
    Plaintiffs bring this class action on behalf of themselves and all other putative class 

members, which Plaintiffs define as follows: “All current and former employees of Defendants 
who were employed as hourly, non-exempt warehouse workers in Connecticut at any time from 
April 16, 2018 through the date of final judgment in this matter.” (Id. at ¶ 43) Plaintiffs allege that 
the putative class members consist of “over 10,000 warehouse workers” employed by Defendants 
at their Connecticut facilities. (Id. at ¶ 22).                           
    Additional relevant facts shall be set forth below as necessary.     
Discussion                                                                
    Plaintiffs assert two causes of actions against Defendants based on their alleged failure to 
pay earned wages. Specifically, Plaintiffs allege in support of both Counts that Defendants violated 

Connecticut’s Minimum Wage Act by failing to compensate Plaintiffs and putative class members 
for time spent undergoing mandatory security screening during their meal breaks and at the end of 
their shifts. (ECF No. 25 at ¶¶ 50, 52) Defendants have moved to dismiss Count One in its entirety 
and Count Two with respect to Plaintiffs Del Rio and Meunier. The Court addresses each argument 
in turn.                                                                  
    Count One                                                            
    In Count One of the Amended Complaint, Plaintiffs claim that Defendants failed to pay 
their straight time wages “in violation of Connecticut’s Minimum Wage Act,” Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 


3 For example, Plaintiffs Meunier and Delaroche allege that some time they spent waiting in Defendants’ mandatory 
security screening process qualifies as overtime. (Id. at ¶¶ 40–41)       
31-72; 31-71b et seq. and Conn Agencies Regs. § 31-60-11. (Emphasis added) Defendants argue 
that Count One must be dismissed in its entirety because it is premised on a right to straight time 
pay “that does not exist under Connecticut’s Minimum Wage Act and because the Connecticut 
Supreme Court has held that § 31-72 is a mechanism to enforce existing wage obligations,” and 
“does not create a substantive right to wages.”4 (ECF No. 37-1 at 1, 5) The crux of Defendants’ 

argument is that “Plaintiffs failed to allege . . . an agreement [setting forth wage obligations] and 
breach of that agreement.” (ECF No. 41 at 1) In other words, although Defendants concede that § 
31-72 “exists to enforce wage agreements,” (ECF No. 37-1 at 4), Defendants argue that Plaintiffs 
have not sufficiently alleged any wage agreement that was breached which would entitled them to 
straight time pay for non-overtime hours. Instead, Defendants note that Plaintiffs’ allegations in 
Count One specifically allege that they “violated [Connecticut’s Minimum Wage Act] by failing to 
compensate  Plaintiffs.”  (ECF  No.  25  at  ¶  50)  Defendants  particularly  “[u]nderscore[]  that 
Plaintiffs’  §  31-72  claim  is  based  on  [Connecticut’s  Minimum  Wage  Act],  rather  than  an 
agreement to pay wages.” (ECF No. 41 at 1)                                

    In response, Plaintiffs identify the allegations set forth in their Amended Complaint which 
state that Defendants “agreed to pay Plaintiffs an hourly rate for the hours they work.” (ECF No. 
25 at ¶ 38) Plaintiffs argue that this allegation reasonably supports the inference that Defendants 
breached a wage agreement which entitles them to straight time pay for non-overtime hours. While 
the Court agrees with Defendants  that § 31-72 is a mechanism by which to enforce wage 
agreements, the Court agrees with Plaintiffs that the allegations plausibly allege such an agreement 
and a breach of the agreement by Defendants. In addition to the allegation that Defendants agreed 


4 See also (ECF No. 37-1 at 6) (“[T]here is no actionable claim for straight time pay for non-overtime hours . . . under 
[Connecticut’s] Minimum Wage Act. . . . [Section 21-72 contains] no mention of a duty to pay employees straight 
time wages for non-overtime hours.”).                                     
to pay Plaintiffs an hourly wage for the hours worked, the Amended Complaint alleges that 
“Defendants did not pay Plaintiffs . . . [the] compensable work time” involved in the mandatory 
security screening process. (Id. at ¶ 2) Defendants’ narrow focus on the failure to allege an 
agreement to compensate Plaintiffs for the time spent complying with the mandatory security 
screenings misses the point. Plaintiffs allege that insofar as the process was mandatory, it falls 

within the agreement to pay Plaintiffs their hourly wage for however long the process took.  
    Accordingly, drawing all reasonable inferences in Plaintiffs’ favor as the Court must, 
Kinsey, 991 F.3d at 174, and all reasonable inferences that Defendants are liable for the misconduct 
alleged, Kolbasyuk, 918 F.3d at 239, the Court finds that the Amended Complaint reasonably 
supports the inference that Defendants violated § 31-72 on the basis of their breach of the 
agreement to pay hourly compensation to Plaintiffs for the hours they worked. Accordingly, 
Defendants’ motion to dismiss Count One for failure to state a claim is denied.  
    Counts One and Two—Plaintiff Meunier                                 
    Alternatively, Defendants assert an affirmative defense to Counts One and Two with 

respect to Plaintiff Meunier, specifically, that “Plaintiff Meunier’s claims are barred by a general 
release he signed over seven months after the conclusion of his employment, while represented by 
counsel in this case.” (ECF No. 37 at 1) Plaintiff Meunier previously sued Defendant Amazon.com 
Services, LLC for disability discrimination. In resolving the litigation, Plaintiff Meunier signed 
the general  release now relied upon in  Defendants’ affirmative defense.  In support of this 
argument, Defendants attach two documents to their 12(b)(6) motion: (1) a September 2, 2021 
declaration of Defendants’ Human Resources Manager, Emily Kidder; and (2) a 2020 settlement 
agreement and general release between Plaintiff Meunier, Defendant Amazon.com Services, LLC, 
and “each of its divisions, affiliates, parents, subsidiaries and operating companies” (“Release”). 
(ECF No. 37-2) In response, Plaintiffs contest the legal and factual applicability of the Release to 
the claims asserted in the Amended Complaint. As a factual matter, Plaintiff Meunier submits that 
it was not the parties’ intention to release any wage claims at the time he settled his disability 
discrimination claim. (ECF No. 39 at 9–10) In support of this argument, Plaintiffs submit an 
October 22, 2021 declaration of Plaintiff Meunier’s former attorney who represented him in the 

disability discrimination claim, Thomas J. Durkin. (ECF No. 39-1) As a legal matter, Plaintiff 
Meunier argues that Conn. Gen. Stat. § 31-72 renders the release unenforceable as to his wage 
claims. (ECF No. 39 at 10–18)                                             
    Defendants’ argument with respect to Plaintiff Meunier relies on extraneous documents 
outside the pleadings—the release itself and the affidavit of Ms. Kidder. As discussed, “[f]ederal 
courts have complete discretion to determine whether or not to accept the submission of any 
material beyond the pleadings offered in conjunction with a Rule 12(b)(6) motion. . . .” Monroe 
Woodbury Cent. Sch. Dist., 2012 WL 4477552, at *4; Ware, 614 F.2d at 415. Here, the parties 
offer competing factual narratives regarding the scope of the Release and its applicability to 

Plaintiff Meunier’s unpaid wage claims. On this record, the Court elects not to accept these 
extraneous documents and affidavits, thus converting the motion to one for summary judgment 
Galvin v. Lloyd, 663 F. Supp. 1572, 1575 (D. Conn. 1987). These issues are better addressed after 
discovery has been completed and the facts fully developed. Accordingly, limiting its analysis to 
the four corners of the Amended Complaint and for the reasons articulated above, the motion to 
dismiss Plaintiff Meunier’s unpaid wage claims in Counts One and Two is denied. 
    Count Two—Plaintiff Del Rio                                          

    In Count Two of the Amended Complaint, Plaintiffs claim that Defendants failed to pay 
their overtime wages in violation of Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 31-68; 31-76b(2)(A) et seq. Defendants 
argue that Count Two must be dismissed with respect to Plaintiff Del Rio because he “fails to 
identify any workweek during which he worked over [forty] hours and passed through security 
while exiting [Defendants’] facility to support his claim for overtime wages.” (ECF No. 37 at 1) 
In response, Plaintiffs clarify that “Plaintiff Del Rio does not assert that he is owed overtime 
wages.” (ECF No. 39 at 9) Any claim for unpaid overtime wages set forth in Court Two by Plaintiff 

Del Rio is dismissed.                                                     
    Motion for Leave to Amend                                            

    On August 26, 2022, Plaintiffs moved for leave to file a Second Amended Complaint 
pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(a)(2). Defendants oppose Plaintiffs’ motion. 
    “[A] party may amend its pleading only with the opposing party's written consent or the 
court's leave. The court should freely give leave when justice so requires.” Metzler Inv. Gmbh v. 
Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc., 970 F.3d 133, 142 (2d Cir. 2020) (citing Rule 15(a)(2)). “‘In the 
absence of any apparent or declared reason,’ including ‘undue delay, bad faith or dilatory motive 
on the part of the movant, . . . the leave sought should, as the rules require, be freely given.’” 
Hannah v. Walmart Stores, Inc., 803 F. App'x 417, 422 (2d Cir. 2020) (citing Foman v. Davis, 371 
U.S. 178, 182 (1962)). “[I]t is within the sound discretion of the district court to grant or deny 
leave to amend.” WGH Commc'ns, Inc. v. Penachio Malara LLP, No. 21-570-CV, 2022 WL 
569665, at *1 (2d Cir. Feb. 25, 2022). However, “[w]here a scheduling order has been entered, the 
lenient standard under Rule 15(a) . . . must be balanced against the requirement under Rule 16(b) 
that the Court’s scheduling order ‘shall not be modified except upon a showing of good cause.’” 
Grochowski v. Phoenix Constr., 318 F.3d 80, 86 (2d. Cir. 2003).           
    “Leave may be denied for good reason, including futility, bad faith, undue delay, or undue 
prejudice to the opposing party.” TechnoMarine SA v. Giftports, Inc., 758 F.3d 493, 505 (2d Cir. 
2014) (internal quotation marks omitted). Regarding undue delay, “[t]he party seeking leave to 
amend [] has the burden to explain the delay and show why an amendment is warranted.” Boudreau 
v. Gonzalez, No. 3:04CV1471 (PCD), 2006 WL 8446804, at *2 (D. Conn. Oct. 24, 2006). “[T]he 
longer the period of an unexplained delay, the less will be required of the nonmoving party in 
terms of a showing of prejudice.” Messier v. Southbury Training Sch., No. 3:94-CV-1706 (EBB), 

1999 WL 20907, at *3 (D. Conn. Jan. 5, 1999) (internal quotation marks omitted). “In determining 
what constitutes prejudice, we generally consider whether the assertion of the new claim or defense 
would (i) require the opponent to expend significant additional resources to conduct discovery and 
prepare for trial; (ii) significantly delay the resolution of the dispute; or (iii) prevent the plaintiff 
from bringing a timely action in another jurisdiction.” Monahan v. New York City Dep't of Corr., 
214 F.3d 275, 284 (2d Cir. 2000) (internal quotation marks omitted). Importantly, though, “[m]ere 
delay . . . absent a showing of bad faith or undue prejudice, does not provide a basis for a district 
court to deny the right to amend.” State Teachers Ret. Bd. v. Fluor Corp., 654 F.2d 843, 856 (2d 
Cir. 1981).                                                               

    Here, Plaintiffs seek to further amend their Amended Complaint to, inter alia, “clarify that 
their lawsuit seeks back wages for “all” time the class was required to remain on the premises from 
clock out to swipe out (i.e., exit) to undergo security screening procedures.”5 (ECF No. 63 at 2)  
Specifically, Plaintiffs’ proposed amendment seeks to expand the mandatory screening process for 
which Plaintiffs seek compensation to “[t]he time spent walking to the screening area, going 
through the screening process, going to lockers to retrieve personal belongings and exiting the 


5 Plaintiffs also seek to further amend their Amended Complaint “to limit the class to just the hourly workers at 
Defendants’ BDL2 and BDL3 facilities, limit their claim for unpaid time from 10–20 minutes per shift to 2–6 minutes 
per shift, . . . limit the class period to March 15, 2020 when Defendants altered their security screening procedures in 
response to the COVID-19 Pandemic, . . . clarify that Defendants’ ‘agreement’ to pay them for all their work is not in 
writing, and to plead more specifically which workweeks Plaintiffs Meunier and Delaroche worked overtime.” (Id. at 
1–2)                                                                      
building.” (ECF No. 63-2 ¶¶ 2, 28, 47, 49) Plaintiffs aver that the proposed amendments do not 
add additional facts and will not require additional discovery or delays to the proceedings. (ECF 
No. 63 at 2) To the contrary, Defendants decry Plaintiffs’ untimely amendment as an attempt to 
significantly alter the nature and scope of the relief sought. (ECF No. 67 at 4–5) Specifically, 
Defendants assert that Plaintiffs have belatedly sought to include not only the time spent clearing 

the mandatory security screening process, but also the time spent walking to the security screening 
area; walking to the lockers or break room to collect personal belongings and walking to the exit 
of the facility at which point the employees “swipe out” of the facility. (Id.) Defendants argue that 
the information needed to assert such claims was in Plaintiffs’ possession before the filing of the 
original Complaint and/or shortly thereafter, and that it is only after discovery has demonstrated 
the weakness of their claims that Plaintiffs seek to expand their claims.6 (Id.) Finally, Defendants 
assert that it will suffer prejudice if Plaintiffs are permitted to amend the Complaint at this late—
post discovery—juncture. (Id.) The Plaintiffs filed a reply to the Defendants’ opposition in which 
they contest any assertion that the Defendants will be prejudiced by the amendment and reiterate 

that the clarification is not an effort to expand the Plaintiffs’ claims. (ECF No. 69) 
    The Court agrees with Defendants that the motion should be denied because Plaintiffs have 
not offered any sound reason for the delay in asserting this expanded wage claim and to allow the 
amendment would be unduly prejudicial to Defendants. See Foman, 371 U.S. at 182. The deadline 
for Plaintiff to move to amend the pleadings was November 30, 2021. The motion to amend is 
clearly untimely. Further, the parties agreed in the Rule 26(f) Report that motions filed after 
November 30, 2021 “will require, in addition to any other requirements under the applicable rules; 


6 Defendants also assert that Plaintiffs attempt to alter the legal theory under which they proceed by making explicit 
that the agreement to pay hourly wages was not in writing. (Id.) As the Court has already denied the motion to amend 
the wage claims, the Court does not address this alternative basis upon which to deny the motion to amend.  
a showing of good cause for the delay.” (ECF No. 38 at 5) If, as Plaintiffs asserted, the proposed 
amendment narrowed the issues and “clarified” Plaintiffs’ claims, the prejudice to Defendants 
would be de minimus or nonexistent and the delay would be of no moment. But this proposed 
amended complaint marks a significant shift in the nature and scope of the litigation; is based upon 
information which Plaintiffs themselves would have had based on their work experience or which 

they received early on in the discovery process; and Plaintiffs offer no satisfactory explanation as 
to why the amendment was not timely sought.                               
    Plaintiffs assert that they only recently discovered that Defendants understood their claims 
to be premised solely  on unpaid time spent  undergoing the security screening process and 
summarily asserts that the Amended Complaint has always included “clock out” to “swipe out” 
time. In other words, Plaintiffs assert there was no delay in bringing the claim because the claim 
was already included in the Amended Complaint and the proposed Second Amended Complaint 
simply  clarifies as much. The Court  rejects  this  assertion and  disagrees that the  Amended 
Complaint can fairly be read to include a claim for unpaid time following completion of the 

screening process. It repeatedly references only the time spent undergoing the mandatory screening 
process; it makes no reference to any post-screening time spent collecting personal belongings or 
exiting the facility thereafter. Indeed, the proposed Second Amended Complaint redefines the 
mandatory security screening process to include walking to the security area,7 waiting in lines 
leading up to the screening area, going to a locker room to retrieve personal belongings, and exiting 
the facility. As this claim was not previously asserted, the proposed amendment is untimely, and 
significantly so.                                                         


7 The Court agrees with Plaintiffs that to the extent Plaintiffs clocked out prior to undergoing the screening process, 
the time needed to travel from the place where they clocked out to the security screening area is fairly contained within 
the claims in the Amended Complaint.                                      
    Further, Defendants’ have demonstrated prejudice if the amendment were to be granted. 
Discovery as to liability and individual damages of the named Plaintiffs will close on November 
1, 2022. The deadline for filing motions for summary judgment is looming.  The proposed 
amendment, as discussed above marks a significant shift in the scope of the Plaintiffs’ wage claims 
and it is unclear whether further inquiry regarding post-screening activities by Plaintiffs or putative 

class members through additional discovery would be required. Moreover, by expanding the 
claims to include unpaid time following completion of the screening process, the proposed 
amendment potentially expands the size of the putative class seeking compensation for unpaid 
overtime in Count Two. On balance, the Court concludes that it would be unfairly prejudicial to 
permit the proposed Second Amended Complaint and Plaintiffs have not established good cause 
for the same. See Werking v. Andrews, 526 Fed. Appx. 94, 96 (2d Cir. 2013); Grochowski, 318 
F.3d at 86.8                                                              
Conclusion                                                                
    For the foregoing reasons, Defendants’ motion to dismiss is GRANTED in part. Plaintiffs’ 

motion for leave to amend is DENIED.                                      
    SO ORDERED at Bridgeport, Connecticut, this 30th day of September 2022. 
                               /s/ Kari A. Dooley                        
                             KARI A. DOOLEY                              
                             UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE                





8 To the extent Plaintiffs intend to redefine the class—drop Del Rio as a Plaintiff; or limit the scope of the claims in 
the Amended Complaint—these goals can be achieved either during summary judgment or class certification briefing.