UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
                  DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                             

___________________________________                                       
                                 )                                      
JOHN DOE,                          )                                      
                                 )                                      
                  Plaintiff,     )                                      
                                 )         CIVIL ACTION                 
v.                                 )         No. 23-12077-WGY             
                                 )                                      
UNIVERSITY OF MASSACHUSETTS,       )                                      
TRUSTEES OF THE UNIVERSITY OF      )                                      
MASSACHUSETTS, HANNAH MONBLEAU,    )                                      
KATE LEGEE, ADAM DUNBAR, and       )                                      
ESMERALDA LEVESQUE,                )                                      
                                 )                                      
                  Defendants.    )                                      
___________________________________)                                      



YOUNG, D.J.                                  April 9, 2024                

  FINDINGS OF FACT, RULINGS OF LAW, AND ORDER FOR JUDGMENT              

I.   BACKGROUND                                                           
   Public universities are necessarily loci of unpopular                
opinions that add to the educational discourse.  At the same              
time, public universities have an obligation to protect their             
students from other students’ misconduct that disrupts or                 
interferes with the operations of the university or rights of             
others.  The Supreme Court in Tinker v. Des Moines Independent            
Community School District, 393 U.S. 503, 507 (1969) recognizes            
that issues inevitably arise where “the exercise of First                 
Amendment rights collide with the rules of the school                     
authorities” and, as discussed in more detail below, instructs            
the district courts –- this Court –- not to act as an appellate           
court, but rather to defer to “reasonable” actions by public              
school officials in carrying out their difficult charge.  See             
id.                                                                       
   In this action, John Doe (“Doe”)1 a graduate student and             

resident advisor (“RA”) was disciplined by the University of              
Massachusetts (“UMass Lowell”) for violation of its Student               
Conduct Code for what it deemed was Doe’s sexual misconduct.              
UMass Lowell employee Hanna Monbleau (“Monbleau”) investigated            
complaints by four RAs (also students) which uncovered other              
misconduct.  A hearing panel comprised of UMass Lowell employees          
Kate Legee (“Legee”), Adam Dunbar (“Dunbar”), and Esmeralda               
Levesque (“Levesque”) (Monbleau, Legee, Dunbar, and Levesque are          
collectively the “Individual Defendants”) held a hearing –- that          
Doe chose not to attend -- and found that Doe had engaged in a            
pattern of conduct towards female students that violated the              
Student Conduct Code.  Doe was not expelled, but banned from              

campus housing, ordered to stay away from the victims, and                
required to complete a remedial behavior class before continuing          
his classes.  Doe filed this lawsuit.                                     
   On November 20, 2023, the Court, as is its practice,                 
collapsed Doe’s motion for a preliminary injunction against               


   1 Plaintiff is proceeding by pseudonym.                              
Legee, ECF No. 20, with a trial on the merits pursuant to Rule            
65 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.  See Electronic               
Clerk’s Notes, ECF No. 25.  On November 28, 2023, UMass Lowell,           
Trustees of UMass Lowell (the “Trustees”), and the Individual             
Defendants (collectively, the “University Defendants”) filed              

their answer to the complaint, raising affirmative defenses,              
including qualified immunity and sovereign immunity.  Answer,             
ECF No. 26.                                                               
   On December 18, 2023, the parties agreed in their pretrial           
memorandum, Pretrial Mem., ECF No. 31, to proceed case stated,            
filing a joint statement of stipulated facts, Stipulated Facts            
(“Stip. Facts”), ECF No. 31-1, and joint exhibit list, Joint Ex.          
List (“Ex.”), ECF No. 31-2.  The University Defendants filed a            
trial brief, Univ. Defs.’ Trial Br., ECF No. 35, and a proposed           
findings of fact and conclusions of law, University Defs.’                
Proposed Findings of Fact & Conclusions of Law, ECF No. 36.               
Similarly, Doe filed a trial brief, Doe’s Trial Br., ECF No. 39,          

and proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law, Pl.’s               
Proposed Findings of Fact & Conclusions of Law, ECF No. 38.               
   Doe dismissed count II (Title IX) by a purported notice of           
voluntary dismissal, Pl.’s Notice of Voluntary Dismissal of               
Count II, ECF No. 33,2 and dismissed count IV (Breach of                  

   2 Doe does not have the right voluntarily to dismiss a count         
without prejudice, as here, after an answer has been served.              
Contract) at the case stated hearing held on February 5, 2024,            
after which the Court took the matter under advisement.  See              
Electronic Clerk’s Notes, ECF No. 41.                                     
   What remains of Doe’s original complaint, Compl., ECF No.            
1, are two counts against UMass Lowell, the Trustees, and the             

Individual Defendants for monetary and equitable relief based             
on: (1) a claim for First Amendment retaliation under 42 U.S.C.           
§ 1983 (count I) (the “Section 1983 Claim”); and (2) a claim              
under the Massachusetts Civil Rights Act (the “MCRA”), Mass.              
Gen. Laws ch. 12, §§ 11H, 11I (count III) (the “MCRA Claim”)              
(the Section 1983 and MCRA Claim are collectively the “Remaining          
Counts”).  At the hearing, the Court admitted the agreed-upon             
exhibits into evidence and, also disputed exhibits B through V.           
Doe does not attack the Student Conduct Code itself under these           
counts.  See Compl.  Rather, Doe’s claim is that his conduct was          
protected under the United States and Massachusetts’                      
constitutions.                                                            

   For the reasons stated below, the Court finds and rules              
that the University Defendants acted reasonably, and therefore            


See Fed. R. Civ. P. 41(a)(1)(A)(i) (providing that a plaintiff            
may dismiss an action by filing “a notice of dismissal before             
the opposing party serves either an answer or a motion for                
summary judgment” (emphasis added)).  At the hearing the parties          
proceeded on the basis that count II was dismissed.  The Court            
dismisses count II with prejudice.                                        
judgment shall enter in favor of the University Defendants and            
against Doe.                                                              
II.  FINDINGS OF FACT                                                     
   The parties stipulated to, and the Court adopts and finds,           
the Joint Statement of Undisputed Facts, see Stip. Facts, which           

are recited almost verbatim and without quotations for ease of            
reference.  The Court also has considered exhibits 1 through 13,          
and disputed exhibits B through V (giving them such weight as             
they are due) as part of the record in this case-stated action.           
   A.   The Parties                                                     
   Doe is a male Indian national in a Ph.D. program at UMass            
Lowell.  Stip. Facts ¶ 1.  The defendant UMass Lowell is a                
public university established by the Commonwealth in Mass. Gen.           
Laws ch. 75, § 1 et seq.  Id. ¶ 2.  It receives federal funding           
for its education programs.  Id.                                          
   The defendant Trustees is the governing board of UMass               
Lowell.  Id. ¶ 3.  UMass Lowell has a campus in Lowell,                   
Massachusetts.  Id. ¶ 4.  UMass Lowell has a Student Conduct              

Code.  Id. ¶ 5.  As part of that Student Conduct Code, sexual             
misconduct is defined as:                                                 
   Sexual misconduct: unwelcomed conduct of a sexual nature             
   when: . . . such conduct unreasonably interferes with a              
   person  or  person’s  work  or  academic   performance;              
   interferes with or limits a person or person’s ability               
   to participate in or benefit from a work or academic                 
   program  or  activity;  or  creates  an   intimidating,              
   hostile, or offensive working or academic environment.               
Student Conduct Code, Ex. 2.  UMass Lowell has a Sexual                   
Harassment Grievance Procedure.  Stip. Facts ¶ 6; see Sexual              
Harassment Grievance Procedure, Ex. 3.                                    
   UMass Lowell employed defendant Monbleau as its Assistant            
Director of Student Life and Well-Being, defendant Legee as its           
Director of Student Conduct and Prevention, defendant Dunbar as           
its Senior Associate Director of Student Affairs, and defendant           
Levesque as its River Hawk Scholars Academy Coordinator.  Stip.           
Facts ¶¶ 7-10.  Doe worked as an RA in a dormitory on campus.             
Id. ¶ 11.                                                                 
   B.   Doe’s Purported Conduct and UMass Lowell’s                      
        Investigation                                                   
   On May 7, 2023, four female RAs J.T., C.T.Z., E.Z, and               
E.H., met with their supervisor to report concerns about Doe.             
Id. ¶ 12.  C.T.Z., J.T., and E.H. made formal complaints against          
Doe.  Id. ¶ 13.                                                           
   On May 19, 2023, Doe received letters from both the Student          
Conduct Office and from a Deputy Title IX Coordinator.  Id.  On           

May 19, 2023, UMass Lowell suspended Doe from his role as an RA.          
Id. ¶ 14.  On May 22, 2023, it issued no-contact orders between           
Doe and each of J.T., C.T.Z., E.Z, and E.H.  Id. ¶ 15.  UMass             
Lowell assigned Monbleau to investigate the Doe case.  Id. ¶ 16.          
E.Z. did not participate in the investigation.  Id. ¶ 17.                 
   Monbleau interviewed E.H. on June 5, 2023.  Id. ¶ 18.  On            
June 5, 2023, Monbleau asked E.H. if there were witnesses E.H.            
would like Monbleau to interview.  Id. ¶ 19.  E.H. told Monbleau          
that she should interview S.K. as a witness.  Id. ¶ 20.                   
   Monbleau interviewed C.T.Z. and J.T. on June 6, 2023.  Id.           

¶ 21.  On June 5, 2023, Monbleau asked C.T. if there were                 
witnesses C.T. would like Monbleau to interview. Id. ¶ 22.  C.T           
told Monbleau that she should interview S.K. and G.D. as                  
witnesses. Id. ¶ 23.                                                      
   On June 6, 2023, Monbleau contacted Doe to schedule an               
interview.  Id. ¶ 24.                                                     
   Monbleau interviewed S.K. as a witness on June 14, 2023.             
Id. ¶ 25.  UMass Lowell issued a no-contact order between Doe             
and S.K. on June 20, 2023.  Id. ¶ 26.  S.K. subsequently made a           
formal complaint against Doe.  Id. ¶ 27.                                  
   Monbleau interviewed Doe on June 23, 2023.  Id. ¶ 28.  On            
June 23, 2023, Monbleau asked Doe if there were witnesses Doe             

would like Monbleau to interview.  Id. ¶ 29.  Doe told Monbleau           
that she should interview A.M. as a witness.  Id. ¶ 30.                   
   On June 26, 2023, Monbleau again asked Doe if there were             
other witnesses he would like her to interview or screenshots of          
messages he wanted to send her for inclusion in the report.  Id.          
¶ 31.  Doe sent Monbleau various screenshots of messages and              
extended explanations of his interactions with the complainants,          
which Monbleau included in the report.  Id. ¶ 32; see                     
Investigative Report, Ex. 10.                                             
   Monbleau interviewed G.D. as a witness on June 27, 2023.             
Stip. Facts ¶ 33.  Monbleau interviewed A.M. as a witness on              
June 29, 2023.  Id. ¶ 34.  Monbleau wrote to Doe on June 30,              

2023 to request a second interview.  Id. ¶ 35.  Monbleau                  
interviewed Doe for a second time on July 5, 2023.  Id. ¶ 36.             
   UMass Lowell sent the Investigative Report, Ex. 11,                  
excluding its appendices, to Doe on July 11, 2023.  Stip. Facts           
¶ 37.  In the Investigative Report, Monbleau recommended “to              
move this case, per the Title IX Sexual Harassment Grievance              
Procedure, to a hearing panel for a charge against [Mr. Doe] . .          
. [of] Sexual Misconduct.”  Id. ¶ 38.                                     
   On July 12, 2023, Michael Coughlin, UMass Lowell’s                   
Associate Director of Student Rights & Responsibilities,                  
notified Doe that his case would move to a “Title IX hearing              
panel,” scheduled for August 7, 2023, and that he “will need an           

advisor to conduct cross-examination.”  Id. ¶ 39.  On July 13,            
2023, UMass Lowell notified Doe that his case would move to a             
hearing panel scheduled for August 7, 2023.  Id. ¶ 40.                    
   On July 19, 2023, Doe notified UMass Lowell that he is               
designating Attorney Ilya Feoktistov (Doe’s counsel here) as his          
“support person concerning this matter.”  Id. ¶ 41.  UMass                
Lowell sent the Investigative Report, including its appendices,           
to Doe and Attorney Feoktistov on July 20, 2023.  Id. ¶ 42.  On           
July 20, 2023, the University notified Doe and Attorney                   
Feoktistov that his case would move to a hearing panel under the          
“Student Conduct process,” scheduled for August 22, 2023, and             
identified the members of the hearing panel.  Id. ¶ 43.                   

   On July 28, 2023, UMass Lowell notified Doe and Attorney             
Feoktistov of a change in the composition of the hearing panel,           
which would consist of Legee, Dunbar, and Levesque.  Id. ¶ 44.            
   On July 30, 2023, Doe submitted a written response to the            
Investigative Report.  Id. ¶ 45; see Doe’s Response to                    
Investigative Report, Ex. 12.  On August 9, 2023, Legee notified          
Doe and Attorney Feoktistov of the individuals anticipated to             
attend the hearing panel.  Stip. Facts ¶ 46.                              
   On August 16, 2023, UMass Lowell sent Doe and Attorney               
Feoktistov a copy of Doe’s response to the Investigative Report           
and the investigator’s response to Doe.  Id. ¶ 47.  On August             
21, 2023, Attorney Feoktistov informed UMass Lowell that Doe              

would not be attending the hearing.  Id. ¶ 48.                            
   UMass Lowell convened a hearing panel on August 22, 2023 to          
determine whether Doe was responsible for a violation of the              
Student Conduct Code.  Id. ¶ 49.  Doe did not attend the hearing          
panel.  Id. ¶ 50.  The complainants and a witness attended and            
gave evidence to the panel.                                               
   On September 7, 2023, UMass Lowell notified Doe that the             
hearing panel found him responsible for sexual misconduct.  Id.           
¶ 51.  The panel issued a written decision setting forth its              
findings, rationale, and the sanctions it imposed on Doe.  Id. ¶          
52; see Letter from Legee to Doe re Decision of Hearing Panel             

(“Hearing Panel’s Decision”), Ex. 1.  The charge, material                
findings of fact, finding, and rationale are set forth in full            
here:                                                                     
   Alleged Violations:                                                  

   Violation: Sexual Misconduct                                         

   Sexual Misconduct: unwelcomed conduct of a sexual nature             
   when: submission to or rejection of such conduct by a                
   person or persons is used as a basis for employment or               
   educational decisions affecting such person or persons,              
   or participation in University programs or activities;               
   or such conduct unreasonably: interferes with a person               
   or  person's  work  or  academic  performance;  interferes           
   with  or  limits  a  person  or  person's  ability   to              
   participate in or benefit from a work or academic program            
   or  activity;  or  creates  an  intimidating,  hostile,  or          
   offensive working or academic environment.                           

   Response: Respondent did not attend the hearing panel.               
   The hearing panel considered Respondent's statements to              
   the investigator as well as his July 30, 2023 written                
   response  to  the  investigation  report  in  reaching  its          
   findings.                                                            

   Hearing Panel Findings:                                              

   Charge: Sexual Misconduct                                            

   Material findings of fact:                                           

   During the investigation interviews, as well as in the               
   hearing on August 22, 2023, the complainants and witness             
   described  respondent  John  Doe  engaging  in  multiple             
sexual  comments  and  touches  without  consent  or  prior          
warning.  All complainants stated that the comments made             
by John Doe were not welcome.  John Doe[’s] July 30,                 
2023 response to the investigation report indicates that             
he agrees that many of the comments did occur with the               
complainants and witness, all of whom he met as a student            
in  the  residence  halls.    The  following  comments  and          
actions are confirmed as fact by all parties involved in             
each incident: John Doe hugged female students, John Doe             
stated to SK "I don't need to someone to have sex with,"             
and John Doe[’s] 'comparison of unwanted sexual conduct              
with unwanted religious proselytism was provocative but              
apt . . .'  Further, multiple witnesses indicated that               
John Doe moved JT[’s] feet without consent.  There were              
discrepant reports about the specific comment about sex              
while eating food and about the reference to shaving                 
pubes and testicles.                                                 

Witness GD stated that John Doe stated "what if I stuck              
my penis in your face?"  This statement, according to GD             
in the hearing panel on August 22, 2023, caused her to               
feel fear and confusion about John Doe[’s] intent in the             
moment.  John Doe states that he did compare unwanted                
sexual  conduct  to   religious  proselytism  in   this              
conversation and meant to do so in disagreement with                 
both.  In the hearing panel on August 22, 2023, GD stated            
that this comment was not welcome.                                   

CT stated in the hearing panel on August 22, 2023, that              
when she did see KG and John Doe, she waved at them.  In             
his interview with the investigator, KG stated that "CT              
came out and waved her hand and a wine bottle. It was                
informal because they were on duty and he doesn't have               
the relationship for them to do that.  He just waved                 
back and told John Doe they're probably just enjoying                
themselves."  In his interview with the investigator,                
John Doe stated that when he and KG saw CT, she waved                
the  wine  bottle  at  them.    In  his  response  to  the           
investigation report, John Doe stated that CT told KG                
that "I know you'll snitch on me."  Witness CT stated in             
the hearing panel on August 22, 2023 that she and other              
students were, in fact, drinking on the night of May 6,              
2023.  She stated that she did not make any statements               
to KG, nor John Doe related to not "snitching" on them.              

In the hearing panel on August 22, 2023, as well as in               
her interview with the investigator, CT stated that John             
Doe told her "If the food is good, I'd have sex while                
eating."  She did not welcome this comment.  In his                  
interview with the investigator, John Doe stated that he             
does not remember saying the word sex while talking about            
food, but that he may have done so.  In his response to              
the investigation report, John Doe stated that CT may                
have misunderstood what he was saying in regard to food,             
and that he may have been speaking similar to the popular            
hashtag #foodporn.                                                   

JT stated in her interview with the investigator as well             
as in the hearing panel on August 22, 2023, that John                
Doe touched her legs with his hands, and possibly with               
his feet, without her consent to place her feet on the               
shaker plate.  In his response to the investigator's                 
report, John Doe stated that he used his feet to move                
her  feet.    This  was  confirmed  by  Witness  DI  in  the         
investigator's report.  In the hearing panel on August               
22, 2023, JT stated that she did not welcome the touching            
of her feet by John Doe.                                             

In the hearing panel on August 22, 2023, JT stated that              
John  Doe  touched  her  thigh  without  consent  when  he           
attempted to show her a video on his phone.  John Doe                
denied ever touching any other students, in either an                
inappropriate or appropriate manner.                                 

JT  stated  in  the  investigator's  interview  and  the             
hearing panel on August 22, 2023 that John Doe made a                
comment to her about shaving his pubes and to several                
students shaving his testicles while there was a group               
of students together in his room to look at his workout              
equipment.    This  was  confirmed  by  witness  RR  in  the         
investigator's report.  In the hearing panel on August               
22, 2023, the investigator stated that she learned that              
RR was there during the comment from Witness DI, and not             
from any other party involved; this is why she asked him             
to provide his account.  John Doe denies making these                
statements, as does Witness DI.                                      

JT stated, in both her interview with the investigator               
as well as the hearing panel on August 22, 2023, that                
she would be hugged by John Doe without him asking to                
hug her, but rather by him approaching her closely with              
outstretched arms to embrace her.  She stated that she               
did  not  feel  comfortable  with  these  hugs.    In  his           
interview with the investigator, he stated that he and               
JT  were  close  friends,  and  that  she  had  made  him  a         
valentine.  In his response to the investigation report,             
John  Doe  stated  that  his  request  for  hugs  were  not          
unwelcome.                                                           

In her interview with the investigator, as well as the               
hearing on August 22, 2023, SK indicated that John Doe               
told her "I don't need someone to have sex with, I just              
want someone to cuddle with," and "I'll be alone, so                 
I'll just jerk off and go to bed."  In the interview                 
with the investigator, John Doe stated he did not make               
any comments of this nature.  In his response to the                 
investigator's report, John Doe stated that he said "I               
don't need to someone to have sex with."  In the hearing             
panel on August 22, 2023, SK stated that she did not                 
welcome the comment.                                                 

Finding: Responsible                                                 

Rationale: In the hearing on August 22, 2023, JT, CT,                
SK, and GD all stated that the conduct by John Doe was               
not welcome.                                                         

As noted above, related to the comment "what if I stuck              
my penis in your face" in conversation with GD, John Doe             
states that he did compare unwanted sexual conduct to                
religious proselytism in this conversation and meant to              
do so in disagreement with both.  With this context of               
intent assumed as fact, the statement remains unwelcome              
by the recipient.                                                    

Related to the comment in conversation with CT, John Doe             
stated that he does not remember saying the word sex                 
while talking about food, but that he may have done so.              
In his response to the investigation report, John Doe                
stated that CT may have misunderstood what he was saying             
in regard to food, and that he may have been speaking                
similar to the popular hashtag #foodporn.  With this                 
context of intent assumed as fact, the statement remains             
unwelcome by the recipient.                                          

Related to moving JT[’s] feet without her consent, John              
Doe stated that he did so to move her feet on the shaker             
plate, and did so with his own feet.  This touching was              
unwelcome and no party noted any conversation asking for             
consent.                                                             
   JT stated that John Doe would hug her without asking                 
   until his arms were outstretched and she felt obligated              
   to engage.  John Doe stated that his hugs with JT were               
   not unwelcome.  With this context of intent assumed as               
   fact, the hugs were not welcome by the recipient.                    

   SK stated that the comments that John Doe made about sex             
   were not welcome.  John Doe stated that he said to SK "I             
   don't need to someone to have sex with."  This comment               
   was not welcome by the recipient.                                    

   The comments to SK, CT, and GD, as well as hugs and                  
   touching of JT[’s] feet constitute a pervasive pattern               
   of unwelcome conduct related to sex directed to female               
   students.  These comments affected SK, who left the room             
   after  the  comment  occurred  to  avoid  John  Doe[’s]              
   conduct,  and  asked  to  not  be  on  duty  with  John  Doe         
   afterward.   JT and CT also indicated that they were not             
   comfortable interacting with John Doe any longer, and                
   that  the  interactions  impacted  their  ability  to  work          
   their student employment positions at UMass Lowell.                  

   Given the aforementioned information provided through                
   the investigation, response to the report, and hearing,              
   the panel finds that John Doe[’s] comments and touching              
   actions were more likely than not unwelcome, were of a               
   sexual nature, and created a working environment in an               
   academic setting that was offensive for multiple female              
   students.  A reasonable person would find comments of a              
   sexual  nature  in  the  academic  living  and  working              
   environment to be offensive.  On the preponderance of                
   evidence standard, this constitutes a violation of the               
   sexual misconduct standard in the Student Conduct Code.              

Id. at 4-6 (emphasis added).  As a result, Doe was                        
sanctioned:                                                               
   Sanctions:  [(1)]  Permanent  housing  removal,   [(2)]              
   elevated probation through graduation, [(3)] research of             
   and  completion  of  approved  consent  training  required           
   prior  to  registering  for  future  classes,  [(4)]  no             
   contact  orders  between  all  complainants  as  well  as            
   witness GD and John Doe                                              

   Rationale:  Sexual  misconduct  impacts  members  of  the            
   campus  community   tremendously.    The   respondent's              
   behavior in this case impacted multiple members of the               
   student  community.     Past  cases   of  findings   of              
   responsibility  for  sexual  misconduct  have  led   to              
   sanctions  ranging  from  elevated  probation  to  housing           
   removal, suspension, and expulsion.                                  

   The complainants all indicated being made uncomfortable              
   to  a   degree  that  shows   a  pattern  of   sexually              
   inappropriate  comments  with   females  who  live   in              
   university  housing.    All  incidents  occurred  between            
   female residents and the respondent while in university              
   housing.  By separating the respondent from university               
   housing,  further  comments  of  this  nature  can   be              
   prevented  from   impacting  other   students  in   the              
   residential  community.    The  lowest  sanction  given  in          
   cases such as these would not remediate the effects of               
   the actions.                                                         

   The panel believes completion of a self-researched and               
   approved  consent  training  that  can  show  that  the              
   respondent has learned appropriate ways to interact with             
   others  in  conversations  related  to  sex  to  prevent             
   further harm and enable him to partake in the academic               
   community  in  appropriate  ways.    Once  proof  of  an             
   appropriate consent training is provided and approved,               
   the  respondent  can  resume  registering  for  courses  on          
   campus.  The course may be taken online or in person,                
   but must be approved by the Office of Student Rights &               
   Responsibilities as appropriate.                                     

Id. at 6 (emphasis added).  Doe did not appeal the findings.              
Instead, he filed this action.                                            
III.  CONCLUSIONS OF LAW                                                  
   A.   A Case Stated                                                   
   The parties have waived their right to a trial and are               
proceeding on a case stated basis.  In a case stated,                     
“the parties waive trial and present the case to the                    
court on the undisputed facts in the pre-trial record.”                 
TLT Constr. Corp. v. RI, Inc., 484 F.3d 130, 135 n.6 (1st               
Cir. 2007).  “The court is then entitled to ‘engage in a                
certain amount of factfinding, including the drawing of                 
inferences.’”  Id. (quoting United Paperworkers Int'l                   
Union Loc. 14 v. International Paper Co., 64 F.3d 28, 31                
(1st Cir. 1995)).                                                       

Doe v. Hopkinton Pub. Schools, 19 F.4th 493, 502 (1st Cir.                
2021).  The Court proceeds on this basis and has done so on               
First Amendment cases such as the instant action.  Id.                    
   B.   Eleventh Amendment Sovereign Immunity                           
   The University Defendants properly raise the affirmative             
defense of Eleventh Amendment sovereign immunity because Doe, by          
suing a public university and its officials, is suing the state           
and state officials in their official capacity.  Under the                
Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution, “[s]tates and their               
agencies are entitled to sovereign immunity ‘regardless of the            
relief sought.’”  Poirier v. Massachusetts Dep’t of Correction,           
558 F.3d 92, 97 (1st Cir. 2009) (quoting Kentucky v. Graham, 473          
U.S. 159, 167 n.14 (1985)).3  UMass Lowell, as an arm of the              
state, is entitled sovereign immunity under the Eleventh                  
Amendment, see Langadinos v. Board of Trustees of U. of                   
Massachusetts, No. Civ. A. 12-11159-GAO, 2013 WL 5507042, at *18          
(D. Mass. Sept. 30, 2013) (O’Toole, J.) (collecting cases and             
holding that “UMass is an arm of the state entitled to sovereign          

3 The Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution provides: “The               
Judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to             
extend to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted              
against one of the United States by Citizens of another State,            
or by Citizens or Subjects of any Foreign State.”  U.S. Const.            
amend. XI.                                                                
immunity”);  Doe v. University of Massachusetts-Amherst, No. CV           
14-30143-MGM, 2015 WL 4306521, at *5 (D. Mass. July 14, 2015)             
(Mastroianni, J.).  Accordingly, the remaining counts are                 
dismissed against UMass Lowell on the ground of Eleventh                  
Amendment sovereign immunity.  Langadinos, 2013 WL 5507042, at            

*19;  see also Doe v. Ohio State U., 219 F. Supp. 3d 645, 654             
(S.D. Ohio 2016).                                                         
   “While a state may not be sued directly absent its own               
consent, the Ex Parte Young doctrine permits suits to proceed             
against state officers in their official capacities to compel             
them to comply with federal law.”  Vaqueria Tres Monjitas, Inc.           
v. Irizarry, 587 F.3d 464, 477–78 (1st Cir. 2009) (citing Ex              
Parte Young, 209 U.S. 123 (1908)).  As the First Circuit                  
explains, this exception “stems from the notion -- some say               
fiction -- that, since a state could not authorize an official            
to violate federal law, by doing so, a state official is                  
stripped of her authority and thus a suit against her does not            

implicate the state's sovereign immunity.”  Id. at 478 (citation          
omitted).  Therefore, “[s]uch suits . . . may only seek                   
prospective injunctive or declaratory relief; they may not seek           
retroactive monetary damages or equitable restitution.”  Id.              
Applied here, with respect to the Section 1983 Claim, the                 
Trustees and Individual Defendants can be sued in their official          
capacity for prospective injunctive and declaratory relief.  See          
Doe v. Northern Mich. U., 393 F. Supp. 3d 683, 693 (W.D. Mich.            
2019).                                                                    
   At the same time, Eleventh Amendment sovereign immunity              
bars claims for injunctive relief against state officials in              
their official capacity for violation of state law.  See Doe v.           

UMass-Amherst, No. CV 19-30056-MGM, 2023 WL 8851056, at *30 n.24          
(D. Mass. Dec. 21, 2023) (Mastroianni, J.) (“[T]he Ex Parte               
Young exception is not available . . . [where] there is no                
ongoing violation of federal law to enjoin.”).  Accordingly,              
with respect to the MCRA Claim, the Trustees and Individual               
Defendants in their official capacities are entitled to                   
sovereign immunity for all claims for injunctive relief.                  
   C.   Qualified Immunity                                              
   The University Defendants also raise the affirmative                 
defense of qualified immunity.  “Qualified immunity protects              
government officials . . . from liability when they act under             
color of state law, and when their actions or decisions,                  
‘although injurious, “do[ ] not violate clearly established               

statutory or constitutional rights of which a reasonable person           
would have known.”’”  Johnson v. City of Biddeford, 92 F.4th              
367, 375 (1st Cir. 2024) (quoting Swartz v. Sylvester, 53 F.4th           
693, 698 (1st Cir. 2022)).4  The Court employs a two-part                 

   4 The Supreme Court and the First Circuit have emphasized            
that district courts ought “resolv[e] immunity questions at the           
analysis: (1) “[t]he plaintiff must ‘identify either controlling          
authority or a consensus of persuasive authority sufficient to            
put an officer on notice that his conduct fell short of the               
constitutional norm,’” and (2) “[t]he plaintiff must . . . ‘show          
that an objectively reasonable officer would have known that his          

conduct violated the law.’”  Id. (quoting Estate of Rahim, 51             
F.4th at 410).  It is well-understood that “[t]he purpose of              
these examinations is to determine ‘whether the state of the law          
[at the time of the officer's conduct] gave [him or her] fair             
warning that [his or her] alleged treatment of [the plaintiff]            
was unconstitutional.’”  Id. (quoting Lachance v. Town of                 
Charlton, 990 F.3d 14, 20-21 (1st Cir. 2021)).  The burden is on          
Doe, and it is a heavy burden to surmount:                                
“[A]n officer is entitled to qualified immunity ‘[i]f . .               
. an objectively reasonable officer could have concluded                
(even mistakenly) that his or her conduct did not violate               
[the plaintiffs'] rights.’”  Stamps v. Town of Framingham,              
813 F.3d 27, 34 n.7 (1st Cir. 2016) (second alteration in               
original) (quoting Mlodzinski v. Lewis, 648 F.3d 24, 28                 
(1st Cir. 2011)).  A court will hold otherwise only if “the             
unconstitutionality of the officer's conduct [is] beyond                
debate in light of an existing principle of law.”  French               
v. Merrill, 15 F.4th 116, 126 (1st Cir. 2021).  This is a               
“heavy burden” for a plaintiff to meet. Est. of Rahim, 51               
F.4th at 410 (quoting Lachance, 990 F.3d at 20).  Qualified             
immunity “gives government officials breathing room to make             
reasonable but mistaken judgments, and protects all but                 

earliest possible stage in litigation.”  Estate of Rahim v. Doe,          
51 F.4th 402, 411 (1st Cir. 2022) (quoting Pearson v. Callahan,           
555 U.S. 223, 232 (2009)).  This Court’s accelerated resolution           
of the merits of this action also has the benefit of resolving            
the qualified immunity issue at the earliest possible stage of            
the litigation.                                                           
the plainly incompetent or those who knowingly violate the              
law.”  Hunt v. Massi, 773 F.3d 361, 367 (1st Cir. 2014)                 
(internal  quotation  marks  omitted)  (quoting  Carroll  v.            
Carman, 574 U.S. 13, 17 (2014)).                                        

Id. at 375-76 (emphasis added).  “Clearly established means               
that, at the time of the officer's conduct, the law was                   
sufficiently clear that every reasonable official would                   
understand that what he is doing is unlawful.”  District of               
Columbia v. Wesby, 583 U.S. 48, 63 (2018) (internal                       
quotation marks omitted) (emphasis added).  Moreover, the                 
“clearly established” analysis requires a high-level of                   
specificity:                                                              
The “clearly established” standard also requires that the               
legal principle clearly prohibit the officer's conduct in               
the  particular  circumstances  before  him.    The  rule's             
contours must be so well defined that it is “clear to a                 
reasonable officer that his conduct was unlawful in the                 
situation he confronted.”  Saucier v. Katz, 533 U.S. 194,               
202 (2001).  This requires a high “degree of specificity.”              
Mullenix v. Luna, 577 U.S. (2015) (per curiam).  We have                
repeatedly stressed that courts must not “define clearly                
established law at a high level of generality, since doing              
so avoids the crucial question whether the official acted               
reasonably in the particular circumstances that he or she               
faced.”  Plumhoff, supra, at . . . 2023 (internal quotation             
marks and citation omitted).  A rule is too general if the              
unlawfulness  of  the  officer's  conduct  “does  not  follow           
immediately from the conclusion that [the rule] was firmly              
established.”  Anderson, supra, at 641, 107 S.Ct. 3034.                 

Wesby, 583 U.S. at 63–64 (emphasis added); accord Ablordeppey v.          
Walsh, 85 F.4th 27, 33 (1st Cir. 2023) (“When defining clearly            
established law, the Supreme Court has instructed courts that             
the dispositive question is whether the violative nature of               
particular conduct is clearly established.” (internal quotation           
marks and citation omitted)).  In undertaking its analysis, this          
Court may proceed with either prong of the analysis.                      
Ablordeppey, 85 F.4th 27, 33.  Failure of the plaintiff to                
establish both prongs results in qualified immunity.                      

Turning to the second prong, it is not clearly established that           
every reasonable state official would know that their conduct in          
finding a violation of the Student Conduct Code was a violation           
of Doe’s constitutional rights under the First Amendment.  In             
fact, in the absence of First Circuit precedent, there is                 
persuasive recent Eighth Circuit authority contrary to Doe’s              
position on this issue.  See Rowles v. Curators of U. of                  
Missouri, 983 F.3d 345, 357 (8th Cir. 2020) (“We agree with the           
district court that . . . [the individual defendants] are                 
nonetheless entitled to qualified immunity because [plaintiff]            
cannot show that he was deprived of a clearly established                 
constitutional right. . . . It was reasonable for [the                    

individual defendants] to conclude that it was permissible under          
the First Amendment to punish Rowles for violating the                    
University's policies against harassment and stalking.”).  Here,          
Doe’s claims of clearly established constitutional rights are             
asserted at too general a level.  Rather, Doe cites cases that            
are not directly in point and do not address the circumstances            
presented here.  Doe fails to meet his high burden.  The                  
Individual Defendants are also entitled to qualified immunity             
because, as the Court determines below, there was no violation            
of a constitutional right.  Accordingly, the Individual                   
Defendants are entitled to qualified immunity for monetary                
damages under Section 1983 on this prong.                                 
   D.   Section 1983 Claim – The University Defendants Acted            
        Reasonably                                                      
   All that’s left is Doe’s claim for prospective injunctive            
relief against the Individual Defendants.                                 
   “Federal law creates a cause of action under 42 U.S.C. §             
1983, which allows a plaintiff to sue persons acting under color          
of state law for constitutional transgressions or other                   

violations of federal law.”  Martin v. Somerset Cnty., 86 F.4th           
938, 943 (1st Cir. 2023).  Section 1983 provides in pertinent             
part:                                                                     
   Every person who, under color of any statute, ordinance,             
   regulation,  custom,  or  usage,  of  any  State  .  .  .            
   subjects, or causes to be subjected, any citizen of the              
   United States or other person within the jurisdiction                
   thereof to the deprivation of any rights, privileges, or             
   immunities secured by the Constitution and laws, shall               
   be liable to the party injured in an action at law, suit             
   in equity, or other proper proceeding for redress . . .              
   .                                                                    
42 U.S.C. § 1983.  “[N]either a State nor its officials acting            
in their official capacities are ‘persons’ under § 1983.”  Will           
v. Michigan Dep’t of State Police, 491 U.S. 58, 71 (1989).  This          
includes UMass Lowell, which is an agency of the Commonwealth,            
and therefore not a person under Section 1983.  See Langadinos,           
2013 WL 5507042, at *16 (“UMass is not a person for the purpose           
of Section 1983.”).  Accordingly, Doe’s Section 1983 Claim                
against UMass Lowell, and official-capacity monetary damages              
claims brought against the Trustees and Individual Defendants,            

fail because they are not “persons” under the statute.                    
   Doe’s Section 1983 Claim fails on the merits.  For over a            
century it has been well-settled that “First Amendment rights,            
applied in light of the special characteristics of the school             
environment, are available to teachers and students.  It can              
hardly be argued that . . . students . . . shed their                     
constitutional rights to freedom of speech or expression at the           
schoolhouse gate.”  Tinker, 393 U.S. at 506; accord Gay Students          
Org. of U. of N.H. v. Bonner, 509 F.2d 652, 658 (1st Cir. 1974)           
(“[T]he First Amendment applies with full vigor on the campuses           
of state universities.”).  At the same time, the Supreme Court            
“has repeatedly emphasized the need for affirming the                     

comprehensive authority of the States and of school officials,            
consistent with fundamental constitutional safeguards, to                 
prescribe and control conduct in the schools.”  Tinker, 393 U.S.          
at 507.  Issues arise where “the exercise of First Amendment              
rights collide[s] with the rules of the school authorities.”              
Id.  “[I]n Tinker, the Supreme Court explicitly stated that               
‘conduct, by the student, in class or out of it, which for any            
reasons -- whether it stems from time, place, or type of                  
behavior . . . is not immunized by the constitutional guarantee           
of free speech’ if leads to material disruption, substantial              
disorder, or the invasion of the rights of others.”  Doe ex rel.          
Doe v. Portland Pub. Schools, No. 2:23-CV-00409-JAW, 2023 WL              

7301072, at *12 (D. Me. Nov. 3, 2023) (quoting Tinker, 393 U.S.           
at 513).                                                                  
   The burden is on UMass Lowell to justify Doe’s speech                
restrictions.  Norris ex rel. A.M. v. Cape Elizabeth Sch. Dist.,          
969 F.3d 12, 25 (1st Cir. 2020).  The First Circuit, applying             
Tinker, holds that “school officials' restriction of student              
speech is justified when: (1) actual ‘disturbances or disorders           
on the school premises in fact occur[ ]’; (2) ‘the record . . .           
demonstrate[s] . . . facts which might reasonably have led                
school authorities to forecast substantial disruption of or               
material interference with school activities’; or (3) the speech          
invades the rights of others.”  Norris, 969 F.3d at 25 (quoting           

Tinker, 393 U.S. at 513-14.).  The test is objective, and UMass           
Lowell may only rely on the reasons it provided Doe at the time           
of the discipline.  Id.  Furthermore, “courts applying Tinker             
generally consider all relevant facts known to the school                 
administrators at the time they disciplined the student or                
decided to restrict the speech.”  Id. at 30; see Doe v.                   
Hopkinton Pub. Schools, 490 F. Supp. 3d 448, 469 (D. Mass.                
2020), aff'd sub nom. Hopkinton Pub. Schools, 19 F.4th 493.               

   The First Circuit has reiterated the deference that is due           
to school officials’ discretion with respect to curtailment of            
speech, noting “[t]he Supreme Court has repeatedly emphasized             
the necessary discretion school officials must exercise and the           
attendant deference owed to many of their decisions.”  Norris,            
969 F.3d at 29.  Indeed, “[c]ourts generally defer to school              
administrators' decisions regarding student speech so long as             
their judgment is reasonable.”  Id. at 30.  Said another way,             
“[b]ecause school officials are far more intimately involved              

with running schools than federal courts are, ‘[i]t is axiomatic          
that federal courts should not lightly interfere with the day-            
to[-]day operation of schools,” Hardwick ex rel. Hardwick v.              
Heyward, 711 F.3d 426, 440 (4th Cir. 2013) (quoting Augustus v.           
School Bd. of Escambia Cnty., Fla., 507 F.2d 152, 155 (5th Cir.           
1975)), and courts must “not second guess their reasonable                
decisions,” id.; see B.A.P. v. Overton Cnty. Bd. of Educ., 600            
F. Supp. 3d 839, 846 (M.D. Tenn. 2022) (observing that “the               
touchstone of Tinker is reasonability”); DeFabio v. East Hampton          
Union Free Sch. Dist., 658 F. Supp. 2d 461, 481 (E.D.N.Y. 2009)           
(“Although plaintiffs seek to second-guess with hindsight the             
judgment of school administrators, that is not the role of the            
courts.”).                                                                
   Here, UMass Lowell’s written decision detailed both                  
uncontroverted and controverted evidence, and provided a                  
detailed rationale based upon all of the evidence before it.              

The Court rules that the findings were well-supported by all of           
the evidence in the record, including Monbleau’s Investigative            
Report, Doe’s response, Monbleau’s response to Doe’s response,            
and evidence gathered at the hearing in the form of complainant           
and witness statements.  See Exs. 1, 11-13.  While Doe admits             
that UMass Lowell found Doe responsible for “five separate                
incidents alleged by four individual female coworker resident             
advisors,” Doe’s Trial Br. 4, the Court rejects the notion that           
UMass Lowell found Doe not responsible for other conduct                  
discussed in the rationale.  Indeed, the fact that, according to          
Doe, the issues span four co-students/co-workers and five                 
incidents that are largely undisputed is, itself, problematic             

for Doe.  Doe’s attempt to spin his intent with respect to his            
speech is irrelevant; “[t]he test under Tinker is objective,              
focusing on the reasonableness of the school's response, not the          
intent of the student.”  Hopkinton Pub. Schools, 19 F.4th at 509          
(citing Norris, 969 F.3d at 25).  Indeed, Doe goes to great               
lengths to isolate his speech and conduct from the effect of his          
conduct.  By doing so, he misses the forest for the trees.  This          
Court is viewing all of the evidence available to the Individual          
Defendants at the time of the discipline, as it is required, to           
determine whether UMass Lowell was reasonable.                            
   Another point that ought not be overlooked is that Doe               
chose -- after retaining his counsel in this action -- not to             

attend the hearing and provide his evidence to the hearing                
panel.  Doe’s non-attendance is a fact that necessarily goes              
into the mix as to whether UMass Lowell acted reasonably.                 
Indeed, at a hearing, the panel heard from the complainants and           
a witness, and was able to evaluate their credibility.  Had Doe           
attended, the hearing panel would have had the benefit of                 
hearing from him and assessing his credibility.  By Doe’s non-            
attendance, UMass Lowell was left with the proverbial “empty              
chair” on the one hand, and the live statements of complainants           
and witnesses on the other.5                                              
   To be sure, there may be myriad reasons why Doe may have             
chosen not to attend, and the Court does not speculate as to              

what were those reasons.  Regardless, Doe’s knowing and                   
voluntary failure to attend the hearing makes it difficult for            
him credibly to complain about what occurred at the hearing, the          

   5 The Court does not have the benefit of the record of the           
hearing (audio or transcribed) other than what is on the                  
deliberation form as set forth in full above.  See Letter from            
M. Coughlin to Doe re Hearing Panel 1, Ex. 9 (“The Hearing will           
be recorded.”).  Neither party has submitted the recording for            
this Court’s consideration.                                               
Individual Defendants’ assessment of the evidence at the                  
hearing, and reasonableness of UMass Lowell’s ultimate findings.          
Nevertheless, even though Doe declined to attend the hearing,             
UMass Lowell filled in the holes as best it could with Doe’s              
response statement –- a reasonable way to proceed -- and                  

apparently would have allowed Doe an appeal even though his               
absence otherwise foreclosed that option.                                 
   Focusing on the task at hand, this Court is not expected to          
retry the disciplinary case, but merely to determine whether              
UMass Lowell acted reasonably upon the evidence, disputed or              
not, it had in front of it at the time it made its decision               
Here, all three of the above Tinker factors are present.  The             
University Defendants did not need to track Tinker word for               
word.  As found by the University Defendants:                             
   [Doe’s] comments affected SK, who left the room after                
   the comment occurred to avoid John Doe[’s] conduct,                  
   and asked to not be on duty with John Doe afterward.                 
   JT and CT also indicated that they were not                          
   comfortable interacting with John Doe any longer, and                
   that the interactions impacted their ability to work                 
   their student employment positions at UMass Lowell.                  

   Given the aforementioned information provided through                
   the investigation, response to the report, and                       
   hearing, the panel finds that John Doe comments and                  
   touching actions were more likely than not unwelcome,                
   were of a sexual nature, and created a working                       
   environment in an academic setting that was offensive                
   for multiple female students.  A reasonable person                   
   would find comments of a sexual nature in the academic               
   living and working environment to be offensive.  On                  
   the preponderance of evidence standard, this                         
   constitutes a violation of the sexual misconduct                     
   standard in the Student Conduct Code.                                

Hearing Panel’s Decision 5-6 (emphasis added).  Based upon                
the above, and the record evidence, the Court rules that                  
UMass Lowell reasonably determined that Doe’s conduct                     
caused a substantial disruption at UMass Lowell as to                     
female students/RAs.  The above conclusion is also a                      
reasonable determination that Doe’s conduct constituted an                
invasion of the rights of other students.                                 
   In addition, the sanction raises the reasonable                      
inference that UMass Lowell had facts that under Tinker                   
“might reasonably have led school authorities to forecast                 
substantial disruption of or material interference with                   
school activities,” 393 U.S. at 514:                                      
   The complainants all indicated being made                            
   uncomfortable to a degree that shows a pattern of                    
   sexually inappropriate comments with females who live                
   in university housing.  All incidents occurred between               
   female residents and the respondent while in                         
   university housing.  By separating the respondent from               
   university housing, further comments of this nature                  
   can be prevented from impacting other students in the                
   residential community.                                               

Hearing Panel’s Decision 7 (emphasis added).  Indeed, UMass               
Lowell’s discipline is specifically, and narrowly, designed to            
stop the conduct from occurring in the future.                            
   Reviewing the record as a whole, the Court rules that UMass          
Lowell acted reasonably in its discipline of Doe.  This case is           
somewhat different than a typical student conduct case because            
the students involved were also RAs –- co-workers –- who live             
and work in the same environment in the dormitories.  In sum,             
the conclusion that this Court draws from all of the evidence is          
that UMass Lowell disciplined Doe after it found he acted                 

inappropriately with several fellow female students and                   
employees in violation of the Student Conduct Code.  Doe does             
not have a First Amendment right under the United States                  
Constitution to engage in inappropriate behavior –- sexual                
misconduct -- with co-students and co-workers to disrupt the              
academic and work environment, and invade others’ rights.                 
Accordingly, under Tinker and its progeny, the Court rules that           
the UMass Defendants acted reasonably and defers to that action;          
there has been no violation of Doe’s First Amendment rights on            
this record.                                                              
   E.   The MCRA Claim                                                  
   “The MCRA is the state ‘counterpart’ to Section 1983 and,            
in general, is coextensive therewith.”  Maroney as Tr. of                 

Premiere Realty Tr. v. Fiorentini, 673 F. Supp. 3d 30, 56 (D.             
Mass. 2023) (Casper, J.) (quoting Bruce v. Worcester Reg'l                
Transit Auth., 655 F. Supp. 3d 1, 11–12 (D. Mass. 2023)                   
(Hillman, J.)).  It is more restrictive, however, because “the            
MCRA provides a right of action to any person whose exercise or           
enjoyment of rights secured by the federal or state                       
constitutions or laws has been interfered with by ‘threats,               
intimidation or coercion.’”  Thomas v. Harrington, 909 F.3d 483,          
492 (1st Cir. 2018) (quoting Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 12, §§ 11H,              
11I).  As an initial matter, “Massachusetts state courts have             
held that ‘the Commonwealth [including its agencies] is not a             

‘person’ for purposes of M.G.L. ch. 12, §§ 11H and 11I.’”                 
Powell v. Massachusetts, No. 16-CV-30004-MGM, 2016 WL 7115887,            
at *12 (D. Mass. Sept. 20, 2016) (Robertson, M.J.), report and            
recommendation adopted, No. CV 16-30004-MGM, 2016 WL 7118260 (D.          
Mass. Dec. 6, 2016) (Mastroianni, J.) (citation omitted)                  
(collecting cases).  Accordingly, the MCRA Claim is dismissed as          
to UMass Lowell and official-capacity claims against the                  
Trustees and Individual Defendants under the terms of the                 
statute.                                                                  
   Under the MCRA, “[a] ‘threat’ is ‘the intentional exertion           
of pressure to make another fearful or apprehensive of injury or          
harm’; ‘intimidation’ involves putting one ‘in fear for the               

purpose of compelling or deterring conduct’”; and “‘[c]oercion’           
is the application of force ‘to constrain him to do against his           
will something he would not otherwise have done.’”  Id. at *15            
(quoting Planned Parenthood League of Mass., Inc. v. Blake, 417           
Mass. 467, 474 (1994)).  To prevail, “the MCRA contemplates a             
two-part sequence: [liability may be found where] (1) the                 
defendant threatens, intimidates, or coerces the plaintiff, in            
order to (2) cause the plaintiff to give up something that [she]          
has the constitutional right to do.”  Goddard v. Kelley, 629 F.           
Supp. 2d 115, 128 (D. Mass. 2009) (Saylor, J.).                           
   All that’s left, as pressed by Doe, is a claim under the             
MCRA against the Individual Defendants for viewpoint                      

discrimination in separating him from university housing and              
informing him that the Lowell Police Department has been                  
notified of his status.  Doe’s Trial Br. 21-22.                           
   As for the monetary damages claims, the Court rules that,            
the Individual Defendants are entitled to qualified immunity for          
substantially the same reasons as the Section 1983 Claim, namely          
both prongs of the test are not met.  See Bonamo v. Betz, 92              
Mass. App. Ct. 1222 (2018) (“The doctrine of qualified immunity           
under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (2012), applies equally to MCRA claims. .          
. .”).  As for the remaining claims from injunctive or                    
declaratory relief, this Court cannot issue prospective                   
injunctive relief with respect to state officials’ purported              

violations of state law.  Thus, claims under the MCRA fail                
without reaching the merits.                                              
   Presuming without ruling that the Individual Defendants’             
actions constituted coercion, see Reproductive Rights Network v.          
President of U. of Mass., 45 Mass. App. Ct. 495 (1998), the               
claim fails.  The Court has already determined that the                   
Individual Defendants did not engage in unconstitutional conduct          
under federal law.  To be sure, “Article 16 of the Declaration            
of Rights, as amended by art. 77 of the Amendments, is at least           
as protective of the freedom of speech as the First Amendment.”           
Shak v. Shak, 484 Mass. 658, 661 (2020).  Doe does not argue              
that the Commonwealth’s protection of speech in the context of            

student discipline is more extensive than the Constitution of             
the United States under the First Amendment at the university             
level.  Indeed, while the Massachusetts General Court has                 
codified Tinker with respect to secondary school speech, the              
parties have not directed the Court to any authority suggesting           
that post-secondary-level speech ought be analyzed differently            
under Article 16 of the MCRA.6  Accordingly, the MCRA Claim               

   6 Arguably, the Massachusetts General Court by codifying             
Tinker to apply to public secondary school speech, and not                
modifying that statute to keep up with subsequent Supreme Court           
precedent provides more (or at least different) protection for            
secondary education speech.  As the Supreme Judicial Court                
reported to the First Circuit with respect to a certified                 
question concerning Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 71,                
Section 82:                                                               

   The parties agree that the authors of the bill                       
   intended to codify the First Amendment protection                    
   discussed in Tinker v. Des Moines Indep. Sch. Dist.,                 
   393 U.S. 503 (1969).  The defendants, however, argue                 
   that more recent Supreme Court decisions in the area                 
   of students' First Amendment rights, see Bethel Sch.                 
   Dist. No. 403 v. Fraser, 478 U.S. 675 (1986), and                    
   Hazelwood Sch. Dist. v. Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. 260                      
   (1988), have narrowed and redefined the holding of                   
   Tinker to allow school administrators to regulate                    
   vulgar or indecent speech in school-sponsored                        
   expressive activities.   This may be true, but there                 
   is no reason to believe that these cases, decided more               
collapses on the merits with the Section 1983 Claim and fails             
for the same reasons as set forth above.                                  
IV.  CONCLUSION                                                           
   Public universities have an interest and duty in the safety          
and security of their students and employees.  In the context of          

a public university, even in the so-called “marketplace of                
ideas,” First Amendment rights are necessarily limited where a            
student’s speech creates a hostile educational and working                
environment.  The delicate balance of these competing interests           
requires public universities to protect unwarranted intrusions            
into a student’s civil rights while at the same time protecting           
other students from harm -- a tall order.                                 
   The Supreme Court, recognizing the special relationship              
that public educators have with their students, requires school           
officials act reasonably –- not perfectly.  The First Circuit,            
in turn, has emphasized the Supreme Court’s mandate that                  



   than ten years after the original enactment of G.L. c.               
   71, § 82, in any way limit the protection granted                    
   under the statute.  Our Legislature is free to grant                 
   greater rights to the citizens of this Commonwealth                  
   than would otherwise be protected under the United                   
   States Constitution.  The decision to do so rests                    
   squarely with the Legislature and we are not free                    
   judicially to create new limitations.                                

Pyle v. School Comm. of S. Hadley, 423 Mass. 283, 286-87                  
(1996)(emphasis added).                                                   
district courts defer to reasonable school officials’ conduct in          
this area.                                                                
   Here, Doe was disciplined for a pattern of misconduct                
against female students.  He was provided a fair opportunity to           
be heard, and was represented by counsel when he decided -– for           

whatever reason -- not to appear at the hearing.  While Doe may           
disagree with the results of UMass Lowell’s decision, and while           
this Court makes no finding or ruling as to whether it would              
have made similar findings, the Court rules that on the case              
stated record the University Defendants’ investigation, hearing,          
conclusions and concomitant discipline was –- and is –-                   
reasonable.  Accordingly, judgment shall enter in favor of the            
University Defendants and against Doe in this action.                     
   SO ORDERED.                                                          
                                      /s/ William G. Young              
                                        WILLIAM G. YOUNG                
                                             JUDGE                      
                                             of the                     
                                         UNITED STATES7                 




   7 This is how my predecessor, Peleg Sprague (D. Mass 1841-           
1865), would sign official documents. Now that I’m a Senior               
District Judge I adopt this format in honor of all the judicial           
colleagues, state and federal, with whom I have had the                   
privilege to serve over the past 46 years.