UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                                              
NORTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                                             
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -           
JOHN DOES 1 THROUGH 7,                                                    

Judgment Creditors,                                                     

v.                                                                        

THE TALIBAN, AL-QAEDA, and THE          No. 6:22-cv-990                   
HAQQANI NETWORK,                                                          

Judgment Debtors,                                                       

v.                                                                        

THE BANK OF NEW YORK MELLON,                                              

Garnishee,                                                              

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -           

APPEARANCES:                       OF COUNSEL:                            

HOGAN LOVELLS US LLP               RYAN M. PHILP, ESQ.                    
Attorneys for Proposed Intervenor    DENNIS H. TRACEY III, ESQ.           
390 Madison Avenue                 ALAN M. MENDELSOHN, ESQ.               
New York, NY 10017                 JONATHAN P. WIEDER, ESQ.               

DO CAMPO & THORNTON, P.A.          ORLANDO DO CAMPO, ESQ.                 
Attorneys for Judgment Creditors    JOHN THORNTON, ESQ.                   
150 S.E. 2nd Avenue, Ste. 602      DANIELA JARAMILLO, ESQ.                
Miami, Florida 33131                                                      

KATSKY KORINS LLP                  STEVEN B. FEIGENBAUM, ESQ.             
Attorneys for Garnishee                                                   
605 Third Avenue                                                          
New York, New York 10158                                                  

DAVID N. HURD                                                             
United States District Judge                                              
              MEMORANDUM-DECISION and ORDER 
 I.  INTRODUCTION 
 Proposed intervenor Deposit Guarantee Fund (“DGF” or “Proposed 
Intervenor’), as Liquidator of PJSC Joint Stock Commercial Industrial and 
Investment Bank (“Prominvestbank”), moves by order to show cause to 
intervene as a defendant in this action under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 
(“Rule”) 24 and to vacate the writ of execution this Court issued on November 
2, 2022 (the “Writ of Execution”).  The Writ of Execution concerns blocked 
assets of Prominvestbank (the “Blocked Assets”) held by the Bank of New 
York Mellon “BNY Mellon”) in Oriskany, New York. 
 John Does 1-7 (the “Judgment Creditors”), who were injured in a 2016 
Taliban terrorist attack, received a judgment for their injuries in the 
Northern District of Texas, and obtained the Writ of Execution in this Court, 
oppose DGF’s motions.  The motions have been fully briefed and the Court 
will now consider them on the basis of the parties’ submissions without oral 
argument. 
 Il. BACKGROUND 
 1.  Ukraine’s Nationalization of Prominvestbank 
 Prominvestbank is a bank based in Ukraine.  Dkt. No. 49-1 (“Fonseca 
Decl.”) at § 32.  In May 2022, Ukraine Business News reported that Ukraine 
had nationalized Prominvestbank.  Dkt. No. 35-4 (“Kostiukov Decl.”) at § 12.

Several months prior to the nationalization, on February 25, 2022, the Board 
of the National Bank of Ukraine issued a decision revoking Prominvestbank’s 

banking license and directing its liquidation (the “February 25 Decision”).  Id. 
¶ 4.  The February 25 Decision also states that, as of January 1, 2022, the 
owner of 99.772644% of the shares of Prominvestbank is the State          
Development Corporation in VEB.RF (“VEB”).  Id.  It further states that the 

shareholder and owner of 100% of the authorized capital of VEB is the     
Russian Federation (“Russia”), and that VEB was created by Russia.  Id.   
Thus, as of January 1, 2022, Prominvestbank was indirectly owned and      
controlled through VEB by Russia.  Id.                                    

The same day as the February 25 Decision, and pursuant to it, DGF       
issued a decision commencing Prominvestbank’s liquidation.  Kostiukov Decl. 
at ¶ 5.  Once DGF began the liquidation process, the DGF Law1 operated to 
strip VEB and/or Russia of any authority or control they might have had over 

Prominvestbank, including by: (1) terminating all powers previously       
belonging to Prominvestbank’s management and control bodies; and          
(2) giving DGF authority to act on behalf of Prominvestbank, including by 


1 As outlined in the Kostiukov Declaration and in a copy of the law attached to it (Dkt. No. 35-8), 
as of April 1, 2022, the DGF Law “establishes the legal, financial, and organizational principles for 
the functioning of the Deposit Guarantee System for Individuals, the authority of the Deposit 
Guarantee Fund for Individuals, the procedure for payment by the Deposit Refund Fund, as well as 
the relations between the DGF, the banks, the National Bank of Ukraine, the authority and 
functions of the DGF to remove insolvent banks from the market and liquidate banks.”  Kostiukov 
Decl. at ¶ 7.                                                             
exercising the powers of the bank governing bodies, taking possession of the 
bank’s property (including funds), controlling the disposition of the bank’s 

assets and liabilities, and exercising all other powers necessary to effectuate 
the liquidation.  Id. ¶ 8.  As a result, since the beginning of the liquidation 
procedure on February 25, 2022, DGF has exercised the management and      
control of Prominvestbank, and VEB has had no control over                

Prominvestbank.  Id.                                                      
The DGF Law also establishes DGF’s interest in the assets of            
Prominvestbank.  Specifically, Article 52 of the DGF Law states that “[f]unds 
obtained as a result of the liquidation and sale of the bank’s property(s), 

investment of the bank’s temporarily free funds in state securities shall be 
directed by the DGF to satisfy the creditors’ requirements” in the priority set 
forth in Article 52.  Kostiukov Decl. at ¶ 9.                             
On March 3, 2022, Ukrainian President Zelensky signed a law requiring   

that any Russian assets seized in connection with Ukraine’s nationalization 
effort be “transferred to the State Budget of Ukraine and directed to the fund 
for the elimination of the consequences of armed aggression” by Russia    
against Ukraine.  Kostiukov Decl. at ¶ 6.                                 

On May 11, 2022, the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine   
issued a decision (the “May 11 Decision”) compelling the seizure of certain 
“objects of property of the Russian Federation and its residents,” including 
VEB’s 99.77% ownership interest in Prominvestbank.  Kostiukov Decl.       
at ¶ 10.  The May 11 Decision was enacted by President Zelensky the same  

day.  Id.  It tasked “[t]he Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine, the [DGF] with the 
participation of the National Bank of Ukraine to ensure the enforcement   
seizure of the property rights specified in this decision of the Russian  
Federation and its residents within ten days from the date of publication of 

the Decree of the President of Ukraine on the implementation of this      
decision.”  Id.                                                           
Although the asset seizure was supposed to be effectuated within ten days 
of the May 11 Decision, the actual transfer of assets did not occur until 

several months later due to administrative and logistical issues.  Kostiukov 
Decl. at ¶ 11.  Instead, on September 13, 2022, the Cabinet of Ministers of 
Ukraine directed the seizure of Prominvestbank stock by means of          
transferring VEB’s 99.77% ownership interest to the National Investment   

Fund of Ukraine, a Ukrainian state enterprise (the “September 13 Order”).  
Id.  The September 13 Order provided, inter alia, that the Ukrainian      
National Bank take all necessary actions to credit securities and domestic 
government bonds forcibly seized and withdrawn pursuant to the May 11     

Decision to the relevant accounts of Ukraine’s Ministry of Finance.  Id.  
A Statement of the Securities Account Status as of December 15, 2022    
provides official confirmation from the Head of the Depository Department of 
the Treasury and Investment Services Department of Ukraine that the       
National Investment Fund of Ukraine owns 99.77% of the ownership          

interests of Prominvestbank.  Kostiukov Decl. at ¶ 13.  Similarly, an extract 
from the Unified State Register of Legal Entities, Individual Entrepreneurs, 
and Public Organizations regarding Prominvestbank as of December 20, 2022 
provides official confirmation from a Ukrainian government-operated registry 

of the ownership of Prominvestbank.  Id. ¶ 14.  The extract states, in relevant 
part, that there is no ultimate beneficial owner of Prominvestbank, and that: 
[t]he reason for the absence is that 99.7726 percent of the shares of   
[Prominvestbank] belong to the State of Ukraine in the form of the State 
Enterprise “National Investment Fund of Ukraine” and there are no other 
natural persons who meet the status of the Ultimate Beneficial Owner.   

Id. ¶ 14.                                                               
2.  Procedural History                                                  
Judgment Creditors filed this action on September 20, 2022 by registering 
with this Court a November 5, 2020 default judgment entered in Judgment   
Creditors’ favor in the United States District Court for the Northern District 
of Texas in the amount of $138,418,741.00 (the “Default Judgment”).       
Dkt. No. 1.  The Default Judgment was issued against the three defendants 
in the underlying proceeding: the Taliban, Al-Qaeda, and the Haqqani      
Network.  Id.                                                             
Also on September 20, 2022, Judgment Creditors filed an ex parte        
emergency motion for writ of execution or in the alternative for writ of  

attachment.  See Dkt. No. 4.  In the motion, Judgment Creditors sought to 
execute the Default Judgment against Prominvestbank’s Blocked Assets      
under the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (“TRIA”).  Id.  The Blocked Assets, 
which exceed $40 million, are held at a BNY Mellon location in Oriskany,  

New York and have been blocked since March 22, 2022 in accordance with    
certain sanctions regulations administered by the United States Treasury  
Department’s Office of Foreign Assets Control.  Dkt. No. 26 at ¶¶ 2-3.  In 
support of its motion, Judgment Creditors provided expert testimony stating 

that Russia actively supports the Taliban and that Prominvestbank is a    
subsidiary of the Russian government.  See generally Dkt. No. 4-2 at 10–15.    
On November 2, 2022, this Court issued an order (the “November 2        
Order”) granting the Writ of Execution.  See Dkt. No. 16.  Based on Judgment 

Creditors’ ex parte submissions, the Court found that it had subject matter 
jurisdiction to conduct post-judgment execution proceedings, granted      
Judgment Creditors’ motion, and found:                                    
[T]hat Prominvestbank is an agency or instrumentality of the Taliban;   
that blocked assets of Prominvestbank are held at the Bank of New York  
Mellon in Oriskany, New York; and that those blocked assets are subject 
to attachment and execution to satisfy the judgment in this matter      
pursuant to TRIA and 18 U.S.C. § 2333(e).                               

Id. ¶¶ 1–3.                                                             
 Accordingly, the Court directed the Clerk of Court to issue the Writ of 
Execution.  See id. { 4; Dkt. No.  17. 
 III. DISCUSSION 
 DGF moves to intervene in this action and to vacate the Writ of Execution. 
The Judgment Creditors oppose both motions.  The Court addresses each in 
turn. 
A. Motion to Intervene 
 1.  Legal Standard 
 Intervention of right under Rule 24(a) requires that the proposed 
intervenor: (i) file a timely motion; (11) show an interest in the litigation; 
   show that its interest may be impaired by the disposition of the action; 
and (iv) show that its interest is not adequately protected by the parties to 
the action.  Hoblock v. Albany Cnty. Bd. of Elections, 233 F.R.D. 95, 97 
(N.D.N.Y. 2005) (citing D'Amato v. Deutsche Bank, 236 F.3d 78, 84 (2d Cir. 
2001) (cleaned up).  Denial of a motion to intervene is proper if the putative 
intervenor fails to meet any of these requirements.  Jd. (citing D'Amato, 236 
F.3d at 84). 
 For permissive intervention under Rule 24(b), the standard is somewhat 
different.  When considering a motion for permissive intervention under Rule 
24(b), “a court must examine whether intervention will prejudice the parties

to the action or cause [undue] delay.”  Hoblock, 233 F.R.D. at 98 (citations 
omitted).  “Additional relevant factors include the nature and extent of the 

intervenors’ interests, the degree to which those interests are adequately 
represented by other parties, and whether parties seeking intervention will 
significantly contribute to full development of the underlying factual issues in 
the suit and to the just and equitable adjudication of the legal questions 

presented.”  Id. (citations omitted).                                     
In considering a motion to intervene, the Court must accept as true non-
conclusory allegations of the motion.  Berroyer v. United States, 282 F.R.D. 
299, 303 (E.D.N.Y. 2012) (citing Oneida Indian Nation of Wisc. v. New York, 

732 F.2d 261, 265 (2d Cir. 1984)).  The putative intervenor has the burden of 
showing a right to intervene.  Id. (citations omitted).                   
 A district court possesses broad discretion in deciding both the timeliness 
and overall merits of a motion to intervene, whether it be a motion for   

intervention of right, or a motion for permissive intervention.  Hoblock, 233 
F.R.D. at 98 (citing United States v. City of New York, 198 F.3d 360, 364 (2d 
Cir. 1999)).                                                              
2.  Analysis                                                            

Upon review, DGF has satisfied the requirements for intervention under  
either Rule 24(a) or Rule 24(b).                                          
First, as for intervention of right under Rule 24(a), DGF has established 
that its motion is timely.  In determining timeliness, a court must consider 

the totality of the circumstances, including: (i) how long the applicant had 
notice of the interest before he made the motion to intervene; (ii) prejudice to 
existing parties resulting from any delay; (iii) prejudice to the applicant if the 
motion is denied; and (iv) any unusual circumstances militating for or against 

a finding of timeliness.  Hoblock, 233 F.R.D. at 98.                      
Each of the above applicable factors support the timeliness of DGF’s    
motion.  DGF was not a defendant in the Northern District of Texas        
proceeding or in the instant proceeding, and the Judgment Creditors do not 

allege it has any connection to the underlying acts giving rise to the Default 
Judgment.  To execute against Prominvestbank’s assets, the Judgment       
Creditors filed an emergency ex parte motion with filings under seal.  DGF 
first received notice on November 15, 2022—which was eight weeks after    

Judgment Creditors filed the application for writ of execution and almost two 
weeks after the writ was issued—when BNY Mellon emailed the Writ of       
Execution and the associated pleadings to Proposed Intervenor.  DGF       
retained the undersigned counsel on December 21, 2022, and the next day   

provided notice to all counsel of record that Proposed Intervenor intended to 
move by order to show cause to intervene and vacate the Writ of Execution.   
Further, Judgment Creditors will not be prejudiced by the grant of DGF’s 
motion to intervene.  The assets Judgment Creditors seek are currently    

blocked, so there is no risk that these assets will be dissipated while DGF 
intervenes.  On the other hand, Proposed Intervenor and Prominvestbank    
would likely be prejudiced if DGF was not permitted to intervene.  The Court 
entered an ex parte order that Prominvestbank is an agency or             

instrumentality of the Taliban; intervention will provide DGF an opportunity 
to object to this order and the Writ of Execution.                        
Second, DGF has established that it has an interest in this litigation and 
that such interest may be impaired by the disposition of the action.      

Intervention requires a “direct, substantial, and legally protectable” interest 
in the litigation.  See Medequa LLC v. O’Neill & Partners LLC, 2022 WL    
3364294, at *3 (S.D.N.Y. July 26, 2022).  As noted, DGF is the designated 
liquidator of Prominvestbank in accordance with Ukrainian law.  See       

Kostiukov Decl. at ¶ 7.  Prominvestbank’s assets are currently subject to 
liquidation, and this enforcement proceeding against its assets will impact 
DGF’s ability to carry out its obligations.  And, as DGF notes, courts have 
routinely allowed liquidators to intervene in cases involving assets subject to 

liquidation.  See In re Reliance Grp. Holdings, Inc. Sec. Litig., 2004 WL 
601973, at *1 (S.D.N.Y. Feb. 24, 2004) (permitting intervention by liquidator 
of insurance company to challenge the ownership of certain insurance policies 
and proceeds at issue); Zurich Capital Mkts., Inc. v. Coglianese, 236 F.R.D. 
379, 385–86 (N.D. Ill. 2006) (holding that liquidator of a Bahamian company 

could intervene as of right in action that threatened assets of the company it 
was liquidating); United States v. All Assets Held at Bank Julius Baer & Co., 
959 F. Supp. 2d 81, 112–13 (D.D.C. 2013) (finding that liquidator of Antiguan 
bank had standing to oppose forfeiture proceedings against assets held by the 

bank prior to the liquidation because a bank liquidator “stands in the shoes of 
the bank it represents and enjoys precisely the same rights and interests”).2   
Finally, DGF has established that its interest is not adequately protected 
by the parties.  The burden to demonstrate inadequacy of representation is 

“minimal.”  Hoblock, 233 F.R.D. at 99.  A proposed intervenor may rebut the 
presumption of adequate representation by demonstrating that it has a legal 
argument that “could not be equally asserted” by the existing parties.    
Schwartz v. Town of Huntington Zoning Bd of Appeals, 191 F.R.D. 357, 359  

(E.D.N.Y. 2000).                                                          
DGF serves as liquidator of Prominvestbank.  Thus, it is well-situated to 
object to the Writ of Execution.  No existing party has the same interest in 


2 Judgment Creditors’ argument that DGF’s interest in the proceeding is “remote, and dependent 
upon four contingencies,” is unpersuasive.  Judgment Creditors’ argument assumes that DGF needs 
to establish an ownership right to the assets at issue.  But Rule 24(a)(2) only requires an “interest 
relating to the property or transaction which is the subject of the action.”  Brennan v. N.Y.C. Bd. of 
Educ., 260 F.3d 123, 130 (2d Cir. 2001) (emphasis added).  DGF has demonstrated that under 
Ukrainian law, it has an interest in the disposition of the Prominvestbank assets; this interest is 
neither remote nor contingent.                                            
Prominvestbank’s assets, nor could any existing party equally assert DGF’s 
legal arguments on its behalf.  To this end, BNY Mellon, a party to this  

action, acknowledged that Prominvestbank is entitled to present its       
arguments in its November 14, 2022 response to the Writ of Execution.  See 
Dkt. 26 at ¶ 5.                                                           
In any event, even if DGF had not satisfied the requirements for        

intervention of right under Rule 24(a), it may permissibly intervene under 
Rule 24(b).  First, as for delay, Judgment Creditors do not appear to be in a 
hurry themselves; after receiving the Default Judgment, they waited nearly 
two years to commence this action, and have now sought an extension of the 

Writ of Execution.  Thus, granting the motion to intervene will not cause any 
undue delay.  Second, as noted supra, Judgment Creditors will not be      
prejudiced by DGF’s intervention because the assets at issue are currently 
blocked.  Third, allowing DGF to intervene and introduce factual and legal 

arguments in favor of vacating the Writ of Execution that no existing party 
would raise permits a more robust and properly developed presentation of the 
issues at stake.                                                          
Accordingly, as with intervention of right under Rule 24(a), DGF has    

satisfied the requirements for permissive intervention under Rule 24(b).   
In addition to arguing that DGF’s interest is too remote and contingent to 
support intervention, Judgment Creditors challenge Proposed Intervenors’  

motion on various other grounds.  None of which are persuasive.           
First, Judgment Creditors assert that DGF failed to comply with Rule 24 
because it did not accompany its order to show cause with a pleading.  But, in 
this case, Judgment Creditors did not file a complaint to commence the    

action, and so it is reasonable that DGF—which intervened as a defendant— 
did not file an answer with its order to show cause.  And even though DGF 
did not attach a pleading, it clearly stated the relief it seeks and the grounds 
justifying that relief in its memorandum of law in support of its order to show 

cause.  See Dkt. 35-3.  Moreover, even Judgment Creditors appear to       
acknowledge that courts have not strictly enforced the requirement that a 
motion to intervene be accompanied by a pleading.  See Dkt. 48 at 11 (citing 
Cross Sound Cable Co., LLC v. Long Island Lighting Co., 2022 U.S. Dist.   

LEXIS 15084, at *15 (E.D.N.Y. Jan. 27, 2022)).                            
Next, Judgment Creditors mount several attacks on DGF’s standing in     
this action.  The Court only need address the first—that DGF needed to    
demonstrate standing in the first place.  To be sure, “an intervenor of right 

must demonstrate Article III standing when it seeks additional relief beyond 
that requested by the plaintiff.”  Gerschel v. Bank of Am., N.A., 2021 WL 
1614344, at *3 n.8 (S.D.N.Y. Apr. 26, 2021) (emphasis in original) (quoting 
Town of Chester, N.Y. v. Laroe Ests., Inc., 137 S. Ct. 1645, 1647 (2017)) 
(internal quotations omitted).  But where a proposed intervenor “merely   

intend[s] to oppose the relief that [plaintiff] requests … [t]here is no  
additional relief for the Court to consider” and so the proposed intervenor 
need not independently establish Article III standing.  Id.               
In this action, DGF does not seek relief beyond that requested by the   

Judgment Creditors.  Indeed, like the proposed intervenors in Gerschel, DGF 
merely opposes the relief sought by Judgment Creditors (i.e., execution on 
Prominvestbank’s assets).  Accordingly, DGF does not need to independently 
satisfy Article III, and Judgment Creditors’ remaining arguments concerning 

standing must fail.                                                       
In sum, DGF has satisfied the requirements of both Rule 24(a) and Rule  
24(b) and its motion to intervene in this action will be granted.         
B. Motion to Vacate                                                     

DGF next moves to vacate the Writ of Execution on several grounds.3     
Most notably, and dispositive here, DGF argues that TRIA does not apply   



3 In addition to the grounds discussed infra, DGF argues that the Magistrate Judge erred in 
determining that there was subject matter jurisdiction in this case.  While these arguments may 
have some force, it appears well-settled that federal courts have subject matter jurisdiction over 
post-judgment execution and attachment proceedings.  See, e.g., Weinstein v. Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 609 F.3d 43,50 (2d Cir. 2010) ((It is “clear beyond cavil that Section 201(a) of the TRIA provides 
courts with subject matter jurisdiction over post-judgment execution and attachment proceedings 
against property held in the hands of an instrumentality of the judgment-debtor, even if the 
instrumentality is not itself named in the judgment”).                    
because Ukraine nationalized Prominvestbank before Judgment Creditors     
applied for the Writ of Execution.                                        

Section 201(a) of TRIA provides:                                        
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, ... in every case in which a 
person has obtained a judgment against a terrorist party on a claim based 
upon an act of terrorism, or for which a terrorist party is not immune  
under section 1605(a)(7) … the blocked assets of that terrorist party   
(including the blocked assets of any agency or instrumentality of       
that terrorist party) shall be subject to execution or attachment in    
aid of execution in order to satisfy such judgment to the extent of any 
compensatory damages for which such terrorist party has been adjudged   
liable.                                                                 

TRIA § 201(a), Pub. L. No. 107–297, § 201(a), 116 Stat. 2322, 2337–40 (2012) 
(codified at 28 U.S.C. § 1610 note) (emphasis added).                     
Thus, to attach property pursuant to TRIA, a party must show: (i) that the 
property at issue constitutes “blocked assets;” and (ii) that the property 
belongs to a “terrorist party” or an “agency or instrumentality of that   
terrorist party.”  See Kirschenbaum v. 650 Fifth Ave., 257 F. Supp. 3d 463, 
515 (S.D.N.Y. 2017), vacated and remanded sub nom on unrelated grounds,   
In re 650 Fifth Ave & Related Properties, 934 F.3d 147 (2d Cir. 2019), and 
rev’d and remanded sub nom, Havlish v. 650 Fifth Ave. Co., 934 F.3d 174 (2d. 
Cir. 2019).  DGB challenges only the latter factor.                       
Courts assess whether an entity is an agency or instrumentality of a    
terrorist party at the time that a party commences an enforcement         
proceeding against the entity.  See Kirschenbaum, 257 F. Supp. 3d at 518  
n.60; Harrison v. Republic of Sudan, 2017 WL 946422, at *5– 6 (S.D.N.Y.   
Feb. 10, 2017).  “The question of whether the property is an instrumentality 

… at that time is the relevant issue.”  Kirschenbaum, 257 F. Supp. 3d at 518 
n.60.                                                                     
In its November 2 Order, the Court found that “Prominvestbank is an     
agency or instrumentality of the Taliban” based on Judgment Creditors’ ex 

parte submission asserting that Prominvestbank is a subsidiary of Russian-
owned VEB, and that Russia “uses VEB and its subsidiaries, including      
Prominvestbank” to provide “material support to the Taliban in            
Afghanistan.”  Dkt. No. 16 ¶ 3.  Accordingly, the question is whether VEB 

(and, thus, indirectly Russia) owned Prominvestbank as of September 20,   
2022—the date Judgment Creditors commenced this action and applied for    
the Writ of Execution.                                                    
With the benefit of a more complete record, this question must now be   

answered in the negative.  As DGF highlights, in spring 2022 following the 
Russian invasion, the Ukrainian government revoked Prominvestbank’s       
banking license, directed its liquidation, and ultimately nationalized the 
bank.  See generally Kostiukov Decl. at ¶¶ 4–8.  Moreover, around the same 

time, Ukraine adopted laws restricting Russian creditors from executing   
against Prominvestbank’s assets.  Id. ¶ 6.  As a result, by the time Judgment 
Creditors applied for the Writ of Execution on September 20, 2022, VEB had 
no control over or access to Prominvestbank’s assets, and Ukrainian law no 
longer recognized VEB as having any ownership interests in                

Prominvestbank.  Id. ¶ 12.  Instead, Ukraine recognized Prominvestbank as 
owned by the National Investment Fund of Ukraine due to Ukraine’s seizure 
of Russian assets, which was part of its broader campaign of resistance to 
Russia following its invasion.  Id.  Indeed, Ukraine’s official government 

records reflect that VEB’s 99.77% ownership interest in Prominvestbank now 
belongs to the National Investment Fund of Ukraine.  Id. ¶ 13.            
Judgment Creditors respond that this Court is not empowered to recognize 
Ukraine’s nationalization of Russian assets.  This argument is unavailing.  

As the Second Circuit long ago observed, courts have “discretion whether or 
not to respect a foreign act of state affecting property in the United States,” 
but will give effect to acts of state “only if they are consistent with the policy 
and law of the United States.”  Republic of Iraq v. First Nat. City Bank, 353 

F.2d 47, 50–51 (2d Cir. 1965).                                            
Given the United States’ clearly articulated and broad support for      
Ukraine’s sovereignty in the face of Russia’s invasion, and given that    
recognizing Ukraine’s nationalization of Prominvestbank aligns with the   

United States’ interests in supporting Ukrainian war efforts, Ukraine’s   
nationalization of Prominvestbank is certainly consistent with this country’s 
policy goals.  Accordingly, the Court may properly exercise—and does      
exercise—its discretion to recognize the Ukrainian law nationalizing      
Prominvestbank’s assets.                                                  

Judgment Creditors’ attack of the record evidence is similarly          
unpersuasive.  Judgment Creditors assert that there is no proof that control 
of Prominvestbank actually changed hands.  But, as noted, DGF submitted   
evidence that Ukraine passed laws prior to September 20, 2022 in order to 

nationalize Prominvestbank.  See generally Kostiukov Decl. at ¶¶ 4–8.  Thus, 
by the time Judgment Creditors sought the Writ of Execution, Russia no    
longer owned or controlled Prominvestbank or its assets, id. ¶ 8, and     
Prominvestbank was not an agency or instrumentality of Russia.  And while 

it is true that the final administrative step of transferring VEB’s shares to 
the National Investment Fund of Ukraine did not occur until December 15,  
2022, Judgment Creditors do not explain why this would compel the Court to 
disregard Ukrainian-passed laws nationalizing Prominvestbank prior to     

September 20, 2022.                                                       
The November 2, 2022 Writ of Execution concluded that Prominvestbank    
is an “agency or instrumentality” of the Taliban and that its Blocked Assets 
were subject to attachment and execution under TRIA.  This was based solely 

upon Judgment Creditors’ ex parte submissions.  In view of the newly-     
developed record, that conclusion can no longer stand.  The Writ of Execution 
must be vacated.                                                          
 IV. CONCLUSION 
 Therefore, it is 
 ORDERED that 
 1.  Deposit Guarantee Fund’s motion to intervene as a defendant in this 
action is GRANTED; 
 2.  Deposit Guarantee Fund’s motion to vacate the Writ of Execution 
issued on November 2, 2022 is GRANTED; 
 3.  The Writ of Execution issued on November 2, 2022 is VACATED; 
 4,  The assets in Prominvestbank’s Oriskany, New York BNY Mellon 
account remain blocked. 
 IT IS SO ORDERED. 

                                      U.S. District Judge 
 Dated:  July 12, 2023 
 Utica, New York. 

                                   20