UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
              DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                              

_______________________________________                                   
                           )                                         
UNITED STATES ex rel.           )                                         
MARTIN FLANAGAN,                )                                         
                           )                                         
     Plaintiff-Relator,    )                                         
                           )       Civil Action No.                  
v.                         )       21-11627-FDS                      
                           )                                         
FRESENIUS MEDICAL CARE          )                                         
HOLDINGS, INC., d/b/a           )                                         
FRESENIUS MEDICAL CARE          )                                         
NORTH AMERICA,                  )                                         
                           )                                         
     Defendant.            )                                         
_______________________________________)                                  


              MEMORANDUM AND ORDER ON                                
             DEFENDANT’S MOTION TO DISMISS                           
SAYLOR, C.J.                                                              
This is a qui tam action alleging violations of the Anti-Kickback Statute, 42 U.S.C. § 
1320a-7b, and False Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. §§ 3729 et seq., by a company that provides dialysis 
services to patients with kidney failure.  Relator Martin Flanagan has brought suit against 
defendant Fresenius Medical Care Holdings, Inc., d/b/a Fresenius Medical Care North America 
(“FMCNA”), alleging that FMCNA improperly provided free or below-cost services to hospitals 
and physicians, and made various types of improper payments to physicians, in exchange for 
referrals to its dialysis clinics.  The complaint alleges that FMCNA violated the Anti-Kickback 
Statute (“AKS”) and caused the submission of false claims for payment to Medicare, Medicaid, 
and other government health-care payors.                                  
FMCNA has moved to dismiss the complaint for failure to state a claim upon which relief 
can be granted pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) and for failure to allege fraud with 
particularity as required by Fed. R. Civ. P. 9(b).                        
The False Claims Act permits relators to reap substantial awards for reporting false 
claims to the government—in this case, the relator could conceivably recover billions of dollars 
if his allegations are proved.  The statute has a variety of strict requirements, however, that serve 
both to ensure that the government has a fair opportunity to control the litigation and to screen 

out claims that are incomplete, redundant, or parasitic.  Here, the motion to dismiss presents 
three sets of issues, all arising from the strict requirements for pleading such claims. 
The first issue is whether relator complied with the requirements of the False Claims Act 
to notify the government of his claims prior to filing suit.  See 31 U.S.C. § 3730(b)(2).  Relator 
did comply with that requirement before filing his original complaint, which was 22 pages long 
and described an illegal scheme with two essential components.  He did not do so, however, 
before filing his amended complaint, which is 147 pages long and contains a number of 
substantially new allegations of different components of the scheme.  Because he did not present 
those new claims to the government, that portion of the amended complaint alleging false claims 

based on that conduct will be dismissed.                                  
The second issue is whether the public-disclosure bar of the statute precludes all or any of 
the claims—that is, whether relator is filing suit concerning matters that had been previously 
disclosed to the public.  See 31 U.S.C. § 3730(e)(4)(A).  Under the circumstances, the Court 
concludes that the bar does not apply.                                    
The third, and perhaps most difficult, issue is whether the amended complaint pleads 
fraud with sufficient particularity to meet the requirements of Fed. R. Civ. P. 9(b).  As is often 
the case with qui tam actions, the issue is not whether the complaint alleges an unlawful 
scheme—it does, in considerable detail—but whether it actually pleads a violation of the False 
Claims Act.  To do so, the complaint must both allege the existence of a scheme to defraud and 
identify particularized false claims.  It is insufficient to allege a scheme and then to make 
generalized allegations that the scheme must have, as a matter of logic, resulted in false claims. 
Here, despite its length, the amended complaint does not describe a single particular false 
claim.  Instead, it alleges that FMCNA paid kickbacks for referrals on a widespread basis, and 

that therefore “all” claims for payment that it submitted to the government were false.  It also 
provides a very limited amount of statistical evidence to attempt to bolster those allegations.  The 
central issue is whether relator can sidestep the requirement to plead false claims with 
particularity by alleging that every single claim is necessarily false.  Under the circumstances 
presented here, the Court concludes that he cannot.                       
Accordingly, and for the following reasons, the motion to dismiss will be granted. 
I.   Background                                                           
Unless otherwise noted, the following facts are alleged in the amended complaint. 
A.   The Parties                                                     

FMCNA is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Fresenius Medical Care AG & Co. KGaA, 
which is located in Bad Homburg, Germany.  (Am. Compl. ¶ 13).  FMCNA is headquartered in 
Waltham, Massachusetts.  (Id.).  It employs more than 40,000 employees and treats nearly 
190,000 patients at approximately 2,400 outpatient clinics in the United States, including 39 in 
Massachusetts.  (Id.).  It also contracts with hospitals to provide dialysis services on an outpatient 
basis.  (Id.).                                                            
Martin Flanagan is a resident of Texas.  (Id. ¶ 11).  He was employed by Fresenius for 29 
years.  (Id.).  His last title was Director of Acute Market Development for the Fresenius Western 
Business Unit.  (Id.).  In that role, he was responsible for, among other duties, negotiating 
contracts under which FMCNA provided dialysis treatment to hospital inpatients.  (Id.).  
B.   Factual Background                                              
Chronic kidney disease refers to the progressive loss of a person’s kidney function, which 
is normally irreversible.  (Id. ¶ 14).  End-Stage Renal Disease (“ESRD”) is the stage of advanced 
kidney impairment that requires either continued dialysis treatments or a kidney transplant to 

sustain life.  (Id. ¶ 15).  Dialysis refers to a treatment regimen aimed at artificially replacing 
some of the functions performed by a healthy kidney.  (Id. ¶ 17).  According to the United States 
Renal Data System, there were approximately 746,557 ESRD patients in the United States at the 
end of 2017.  (Id. ¶ 15).  Roughly 90% of all dialysis patients undergo hemodialysis at a dialysis 
clinic three times per week.  (Id. ¶ 18).  FMCNA is America’s largest dialysis-services provider.  
(Id. ¶ 13).                                                               
Medicare is a federally-funded health-insurance program that primarily provides benefits 
to the elderly, but also provides coverage to patients with ESRD, regardless of age.  (Id. ¶ 19).  
The Medicare ESRD program is administered through the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 

Services (“CMS”), an agency within the Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS”).  
(Id. ¶ 25).  Since 1972, Medicare has been the primary payor for more than 80% of the cost of 
dialysis treatment for nearly 800,000 ESRD patients in the United States.  (Id. ¶ 22).  ESRD 
expenditures by Medicare exceed $40 billion annually.  (Id. ¶ 23).        
According to the complaint, FMCNA clinics and other providers treating ESRD submit 
to the government one reimbursement claim bill per month for each patient, including the 
charges for several dialysis treatments, any separately billable laboratory services, and separately 
billable drugs.  (Id. ¶ 28).                                              
Medicaid is a state-administered program where each state sets its own guidelines 
concerning eligibility and services, with funding coming jointly from the states and the federal 
government.  (Id. ¶ 38).  In many states, Medicaid pays for treatment costs for ESRD patients 
who do not qualify for Medicare and/or pays for the 20% of treatment costs not covered by 
Medicare.  (Id. ¶ 45).  Submission of claims to Medicaid that were ineligible for payment 
because of violation of the AKS are actionable under the FCA because the payments of those 

claims were made with federal funds.  (Id. ¶ 44).                         
In addition to Medicare and Medicaid, CHAMPUS/TRICARE, which is administered by 
the United States Department of Defense, provides ESRD benefits to health-care programs for 
individuals and dependents affiliated with the armed forces and to covered beneficiaries.  (Id. 
¶ 35).  CHAMPVA, which is administered by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs, 
is a health-care program for families of veterans with 100% service-connected disabilities and 
provides ESRD benefits to covered beneficiaries.  (Id.).                  
C.   FMCNA’s Allegedly Improper Conduct                              
The complaint alleges various methods by which FMCNA improperly induced the 

referral of patients to its dialysis clinics.  First, it alleges that FMCNA offered remuneration to 
hospitals in two ways:  by entering into contracts that provided no-cost and/or below-cost 
inpatient dialysis services, and by providing “significant” free services, including free discharge-
planning services, free in-service training to staff, free training to patients, and free quality 
assessment and improvement data analysis to hospitals.  (Id. ¶¶ 81-166).  Second, it alleges that 
FMCNA engaged in improper remuneration relationships with physicians who served as medical 
directors in its outpatient clinics in five ways:  by selecting medical directors based on their 
expected and historical referrals; by paying them above-market compensation to reward 
referrals; by making no effort to report or verify their hours; by tracking their referrals to make 
sure they were not making referrals to competitors; and by requiring them to sign onerous non-
compete agreements to lock them into their arrangements with FMCNA.  (Id. ¶¶ 167-307).  
Third, it alleges that FMCNA provided physicians free or below-cost practice-management 
services.  (Id. ¶¶ 308-20).  Fourth, it alleges that FMCNA entered into favorable leases with 
medical directors that paid them above-market rates.  (Id. ¶¶ 321-31).  Fifth, it alleges that 

FMCNA entered into favorable joint-venture agreements (“JVAs”) with physician groups to 
induce them to make referrals.  (Id. ¶¶ 332-75).                          
     1.   Hospital Services                                          
According to the complaint, over the past two decades, the dialysis industry has become 
increasingly concentrated in the hands of two companies:  DaVita and FMCNA.  (Id. ¶ 84).  
Beginning in approximately 2007, FMCNA allegedly realized that the company’s “organic 
growth” (that is, growth from adding new patients and not through acquisitions) was almost non-
existent.  (Id. ¶ 85).  FMCNA decided that one of the keys to capturing new patients for its 

dialysis clinics was through its relationships with hospitals providing inpatient acute care.   
          a.   Below-Cost Dialysis Services                          
The complaint alleges that FMCNA made a calculated business decision to offer inpatient 
dialysis services to hospitals at prices well below cost in order to capture referrals of discharged 
patients to its dialysis clinics.  (Id. ¶ 83).  Flanagan and his colleagues were allegedly instructed 
by their superiors to obtain hospital contracts “at any cost” to secure the referrals of discharged 
patients.  (Id. ¶ 88).  Bonuses and performance evaluations for mid-level managers were tied, in 
part, to patient growth and the increase in number of treatments at individual clinics.  (Id. ¶ 89).   
According to the complaint, FMCNA budgeted for the anticipated losses in the acute 
programs at many of the larger hospitals.  (Id. ¶ 90).  Internal spreadsheets from the Western 
Business Unit show that FMCNA recorded losses on its contracts with hospitals, often in excess 
of the budgeted losses.  (Id. ¶¶ 91, 93).  Although the budgetary spreadsheets were reviewed and 
approved by mid-level and upper management, the complaint alleges that the decision to run 
hospital programs at a loss was made by corporate management.  (Id. ¶ 93).  It alleges that 
Flanagan and colleagues were directed by their superiors to pursue contracts even when they 

resulted in losses.  (Id. ¶¶ 97-106).  And it further alleges that Flanagan was instructed not to 
enforce “escalator” clauses, which called for annual fee increases of up to 4.0%.  (Id. ¶¶ 110-11).  
          b.   Free Services to Hospitals and Patients               
The complaint alleges that FMCNA provided free discharge-planning services to 
hospitals, free in-service training to staff, free training to patients, and free quality assessment 
and improvement program data analysis.  (Id. ¶ 128).  FMCNA also established the Bridge 
Program, allegedly to “help hospitals save money by streamlining the process for patient 
discharge from the hospital and admission to a chronic facility for dialysis.”  (Id. ¶ 131).  The 
complaint alleges that the Bridge Program was actually designed to capture all of a hospital’s 

referrals, as “about half of the company’s patients came into [FMCNA] clinics via [the discharge 
planning process].”  (Id. ¶¶ 132, 140).  FMCNA tracked the referrals recorded as part of the 
Bridge Program.  (Id. ¶ 162).  It alleges that although FMCNA directed that “all services 
provided under the Bridge Program must be provided at FMV,” Flanagan was never required to 
obtain an FMV analysis for any hospital contract or for Bridge Program services during his 
tenure with the company.  (Id. ¶¶ 142-43).  Instead, those services were provided free of charge.  
(Id.).                                                                    
     2.   Medical Director Compensation                              
By law, all outpatient dialysis clinics must have a qualified medical director “to be 
responsible for the delivery of patient care and outcomes in the facility.”  42 C.F.R. § 494.150; 
Am. Compl. ¶ 170.  Medical directors are not FMCNA employees, but physicians in private 
practice.                                                                 
The complaint alleges that FMCNA engaged in improper remunerative relationships with 
medical directors in its outpatient clinics to capture their referrals.  (Am. Compl. ¶¶ 167-69).  It 

alleges that FMCNA courted nephrologists in multi-physician private practices with high 
numbers of patients to be medical directors, often offering to pay them more than $100,000 
annually in exchange for patient referrals.  (Id. ¶ 176).                 
According to the complaint, FMCNA pitched medical-director positions to nephrologists 
as a way “to earn a considerable income for little or no investment of time.”  (Id. ¶ 181).  A 
medical director’s “productivity” was tracked, and contracts with medical directors who 
generated a large number of patients were renewed.  (Id. ¶¶ 184-97).  Patients who were referred 
to non-FMCNA clinics were categorized as “leakage.”  (Id. ¶ 217).  FMCNA generated reports 
to track which medical directors and their practice groups referred patients to outside clinics and 

the reasons why.  (Id.).                                                  
The complaint further alleges that FMCNA paid its medical directors far above fair 
market value.  (Id. ¶¶ 198-205).  For example, medical directors at 160 FMCNA clinics made 
more than $300,000 in 2019, well above the average compensation of medical directors at 
similarly located clinics.  (Id.).  And even though the regulatory guidance defines the medical-
director position as occupying 0.25 FTE, the complaint alleges that FMCNA neither tracked nor 
enforced medical directors’ hours spent on duties to their clinics.  (Id. ¶¶ 172, 206-13).  
Finally, the complaint alleges that medical directors were required to sign agreements 
containing non-competition provisions in order to preclude any medical director and those in the 
same practice group from engaging in any remunerative relationship with another dialysis 
company.  (Id. ¶ 223).  Physicians who wanted to terminate the non-competition agreements 
were forced to negotiate onerous buyouts.  (Id. ¶ 228).                   
     3.   Free or Below-Cost Management Services                     

The complaint further alleges that FMCNA provided free or below-cost services to 
physicians to secure referrals.  (Id. ¶¶ 308, 321).  According to the complaint, FMCNA offered 
physicians the opportunity to enter into free practice-management agreements, in return for 
which it obtained the practice’s data from the prior three to five years.  It then used that data to 
identify physicians and practice groups to target for medical director positions and joint-venture 
agreements.  (Id. ¶¶ 308-14).                                             
     4.   Favorable Leases                                           
According to the complaint, FMCNA also paid physician groups rent above fair market 
value and provided leases below fair market value in order to secure referrals.  (Id. ¶ 331).   

     5.   Joint-Venture Agreements                                   
Finally, the complaint alleges that FMCNA entered into joint-venture agreements with 
physicians in order to induce referrals to the joint-venture clinic.  (Id. ¶ 332).  According to the 
complaint, FMCNA paid inflated amounts for controlling interests in the joint venture while 
selling shares below fair market value to physicians who were in a position to make referrals.  
(Id. ¶¶ 334-35).  Moreover, referral sources were routinely permitted to own more than 40% of 
the joint venture investment, contrary to HHS OIG guidance.  (Id. ¶¶ 332-36).  The complaint 
further alleges that FMCNA would typically pay high-performing physicians 10 to 12% of the 
clinic’s topline revenue, whereas it would pay lower-performing physicians up to 6% of topline 

revenue.  (Id. ¶ 343).  FMCNA also inserted non-competition clauses into their JVAs in order to 
lock partners into referring patients to its facility.  (Id. ¶¶ 368-74).  
D.   Procedural Background                                           
Flanagan filed the original complaint on March 6, 2014, alleging presentation of false 
claims in violation of the False Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(A) (Count 1); making or 
using false records material to a false or fraudulent claim in violation of the False Claims Act, 31 

U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(B) (Count 2); and conspiring to present false claims and making or using 
false records material to a false or fraudulent claim in violation of the False Claims Act, 31 
U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(C) (Count 3).  Essentially, that version of the complaint alleged that 
FMCNA’s efforts to incentivize referrals to its clinics violated the Anti-Kickback Statute, 42 
U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(b), and the resulting claims to Medicare were tainted by illegal kickbacks in 
violation of the False Claims Act.                                        
After a review of the claims, the government declined to intervene.  FMCNA then moved 
to dismiss the complaint.  In response, relator filed an amended complaint.   
FMCNA has moved to dismiss the amended complaint on the grounds that (1) the 

amended complaint is essentially a new complaint and should therefore have been filed under 
seal as required by 31 U.S.C. § 3730(b)(2); (2) the claims are barred by the FCA public-
disclosure bar, 31 U.S.C. § 3730(e)(4); (3) the claims concerning joint-venture agreements are 
barred by the FCA’s first-to-file bar, 31 U.S.C. § 3730(b)(5); (4) the complaint has not pleaded 
fraud with particularity as required by Rule 9(b); and (5) the complaint fails to state a claim for 
FCA conspiracy.                                                           
II.  Standard of Review                                                   
On a motion to dismiss, the court “must assume the truth of all well-plead[ed] facts and 
give . . . plaintiff the benefit of all reasonable inferences therefrom.”  Ruiz v. Bally Total Fitness 
Holding Corp., 496 F.3d 1, 5 (1st Cir. 2007) (citing Rogan v. Menino, 175 F.3d 75, 77 (1st Cir. 
1999)).  To survive a motion to dismiss, the complaint must state a claim that is plausible on its 
face.  Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007).  That is, “[f]actual allegations must 
be enough to raise a right to relief above the speculative level . . . on the assumption that all the 
allegations in the complaint are true (even if doubtful in fact).”  Id. at 555 (citations omitted).  

“The plausibility standard is not akin to a ‘probability requirement,’ but it asks for more than a 
sheer possibility that a defendant has acted unlawfully.”  Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678 
(2009) (quoting Twombly, 550 U.S. at 556).  Dismissal is appropriate if the complaint fails to set 
forth “factual allegations, either direct or inferential, respecting each material element necessary 
to sustain recovery under some actionable legal theory.”  Gagliardi v. Sullivan, 513 F.3d 301, 
305 (1st Cir. 2008) (quoting Centro Medico del Turabo, Inc. v. Feliciano de Melecio, 406 F.3d 1, 
6 (1st Cir. 2005)).                                                       
Under Rule 9(b), the standard for allegations of fraud is higher than the normal pleading 
standard.  To survive a motion to dismiss, a complaint alleging fraud must “state with 

particularity the circumstances constituting fraud.”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 9(b). 
III.  The Regulatory Framework                                            
The False Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. §§ 3729-33, provides for civil liability for anyone who 
“knowingly presents, or causes to be presented, a false or fraudulent claim for payment or 
approval” or “knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made or used, a false record or statement 
material to a false or fraudulent claim.”  31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(A), (a)(1)(B).  A “claim” is “any 
request or demand . . . for money or property” presented to an officer, employee, or agent of the 
United States.  31 U.S.C. § 3729(b)(2).  Private persons, known as relators, can file civil qui tam 
actions on behalf of the United States against persons or entities who violate the act.  Id. 
§ 3730(b).  The government can intervene in a qui tam action and assume primary responsibility 
over it.  Id. § 3730(b)(2), (b)(4), (c)(1).  The relator is eligible to collect a portion of any damages 
awarded in a qui tam action, whether or not the government intervenes.  Id. § 3730(d). 
The Anti-Kickback Statute, 42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b, states that “whoever knowingly and 
willfully offers or pays any remuneration (including any kickback, bribe, or rebate) directly or 

indirectly, overtly or covertly, in cash or in kind to any person to induce such person . . . to 
purchase . . . or recommend purchasing . . . any good, facility, service, or item for which 
payment may be made in whole or in part under a Federal health care program” shall be guilty of 
a felony.  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(b)(2).  In 2010, Congress amended the AKS to clarify that any 
Medicare claim “that includes items or services resulting from a violation of [the AKS] 
constitutes a false or fraudulent claim for the purposes of [the FCA].”  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(g); 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, Pub. L. No. 111-148, 124 Stat. 119 (2010).  In other 
words, “an AKS violation that results in a federal health care payment is a per se false claim 
under the FCA.”  Guilfoile v. Shields, 913 F.3d 178, 190 (1st Cir. 2019) (quoting U.S. ex rel. 

Lutz v. United States, 853 F.3d 131, 135 (4th Cir. 2017)).                
IV.  Analysis                                                             
A.   Mandatory Pre-Suit Requirements                                 
Defendant contends that the amended complaint should be dismissed for failure to 
comply with the pre-suit requirements of the FCA, 31 U.S.C. § 3730(b)(2).  
Under the FCA, a relator must comply with the following requirements:   
 A copy of the complaint and written disclosure of substantially all material 
 evidence and information the person possesses shall be served on the 
 Government . . . . The complaint shall be filed in camera, shall remain under seal 
 for at least 60 days, and shall not be served on the defendant until the court so 
 orders.  The Government may elect to intervene and proceed with the action 
 within 60 days after it receives both the complaint and the material evidence and 
 information.                                                        

31 U.S.C. § 3730(b)(2).                                                   
Those notification requirements were enacted “to allow the Government an adequate 
opportunity to fully evaluate the private enforcement suit and determine both if that suit involves 
matters the Government is already investigating and whether it is in the Government's interest to 
intervene and take over the civil action.”  United States ex rel. Pilon v. Martin Marietta Corp., 
60 F.3d 995, 998-99 (2d Cir. 1995) (quoting S. Rep. No. 99-345, 1986 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5266, 
5289).  “A secondary objective was to prevent defendants from having to answer complaints 
without knowing whether the government or relators would pursue the litigation.”  Id. at 999.  
Accordingly, “[f]ailure to comply with these mandatory threshold requirements warrants 
dismissal of the qui tam complaint with prejudice.”  United States ex rel. Stevens v. Vermont 
Agency of Nat. Res., 162 F.3d 195, 200 (2d Cir. 1998) (rev’d on other grounds, 529 U.S. 765 
(2000)).                                                                  
If the government declines to intervene and the qui tam case is unsealed, further 

proceedings are governed by 31 U.S.C. § 3730(c)(3).  That statute provides: 
If the Government elects not to proceed with the action, the person who initiated 
the action shall have the right to conduct the action.  If the Government so 
requests, it shall be served with copies of all pleadings filed in the action and shall 
be supplied with copies of all deposition transcripts (at the Government's 
expense).  When a person proceeds with the action, the court, without limiting the 
status and rights of the person initiating the action, may nevertheless permit the 
Government to intervene at a later date upon a showing of good cause.  

31 U.S.C. § 3730(c)(3).                                                   
The policy behind that requirement—allowing the government to investigate the claims 
and decide whether to intervene—is implicated when a relator amends a complaint to add 
completely new FCA claims.  See East Bay Mun. Util. Dist. v. Balfour Beatty Infrastructure, 
Inc., 2014 WL 2611312, at *2 (N.D. Cal. June 11, 2014).  Courts have therefore required relators 
to abide by those requirements when filing an amended complaint that is not “substantially 
similar” to the original complaint.  Id. at *3 (collecting cases).  For example, in United States ex 
rel. Wilson v. Bristol-Myers Squibb, Inc., 750 F.3d 111 (1st Cir. 2014), the First Circuit affirmed 
the denial of a motion to amend the complaint a third time.  750 F.3d at 120.  The proposed 

amendments in that case were completely new allegations from a new qui tam plaintiff.  United 
States ex rel. Wilson v. Bristol-Myers Squibb, Inc., 2011 WL 2462469, at *6-7 (D. Mass. June 
16, 2011).  The district court had found that the relators had violated the filing and service 
requirements of the FCA because the new allegations were not substantially similar to those in 
the original complaint.  Id.  In affirming that decision, the First Circuit stated that “the new 
paragraphs in the [p]roposed [complaint] were attributable to the new relator and . . . they 
[therefore] violated the FCA's filing and service requirements.”  Wilson, 750 F.3d at 120. 
Here, the original complaint was 22 pages long and contained 54 numbered paragraphs.  
The description of the alleged scheme consisted of 25 paragraphs.  Of those, thirteen described a 

scheme “to offer dialysis services to hospitals well below cost in order to capture referrals.”  
(Compl. ¶ 26).  Another six described a scheme involving “improper remuneration relationships 
with physicians who serve as medical directors at Fresenius clinics.”  (Id. ¶ 39).  It alleged that 
“[t]hese problematic physician relationships generally break down into two areas.”  (Id.).  The 
first was that “these physicians were generally paid in excess of fair market value for the services 
they actually rendered.”  (Id.).  The second was that “these same doctors are often provided with 
opportunities to rent office space that they own to Fresenius at above or at the very top of fair 
market value,” with guaranteed long-term leases that are “not commercially reasonable.”  (Id. 
¶ 40).1                                                                   
The original complaint referred to joint-venture agreements between FMCNA and 
physicians, but only in order to contrast such agreements (which it referred to as a product of 
“arms-length negotiations”) with the higher compensation paid to medical directors in the 
absence of such agreements.  (Id. ¶ 41 (“The fact that medical director compensation is lower 

where the physician actually shares the cost of his or her compensation through his or her joint 
venture (ownership) agreement shows that where there are arms-length negotiations between two 
more or less equal parties, a lower compensation rate results.”)).  It did not allege that FMCNA 
improperly provided free services to hospitals and patients in the form of free discharge-planning 
services, free in-service training to staff, free training to patients, and free quality assessment and 
improvement program data analysis, nor did it mention the Bridge Program.  And it did not 
allege that FMCNA provided free or below-cost practice-management services to physicians. 
The initial complaint has since been amended to add 125 pages of allegations, including 
multiple new claims.  Defendant correctly contends that the initial complaint did not contain any 

allegations concerning unlawful joint-venture agreements, or the provision of free services to 
hospitals, physicians, and patients.  The portions of the claims based on those allegations will 
therefore be dismissed for failing to comply with the FCA’s pre-suit requirements.   
Defendant further contends that the original complaint did not contain any allegations 
concerning medical-director agreements, and that all claims based on such agreements should 
likewise be dismissed.  While it is true that it did not use the term “medical director agreements,” 
its allegations concerning improper remuneration to physicians in the form of compensation 


1 The remaining six paragraphs describing the alleged scheme consisted of an introductory paragraph 
(Compl. ¶ 25) and five paragraphs addressing how the scheme resulted in false claims (Id. ¶¶ 45-49).     
above fair-market value and favorable leases are nonetheless “substantially similar” to those in 
the amended complaint.  To the extent that the amended complaint addresses those remuneration 
relationships, therefore, the claims will not be dismissed.               
In summary, because the new allegations concerning (1) joint-venture agreements, (2) 
free services to hospitals and patients, and (3) free practice-management services to physicians 

are not substantially similar to the allegations in the initial complaint, that portion of the 
complaint will be dismissed for failure to comply with the filing and service requirements of the 
FCA.  See Wilson, 2011 WL 2462469, at *7.                                 
B.   The Public-Disclosure Bar                                       
Defendant next contends that the remaining FCA claims in the amended complaint are 
barred by the public-disclosure bar of the statute, 31 U.S.C. § 3730(e)(4)(A). 
The qui tam provisions of the FCA permit relators, in some instances, to reap huge 
financial windfalls.  “Although this financial incentive encourages would-be relators to expose 
fraud, it also attracts parasitic relators who bring FCA damages claims based on information 

within the public domain or that the relator did not otherwise discover.”  United States ex rel. 
Duxbury v. Ortho Biotech Prods., L.P., 719 F.3d 31, 33 (1st Cir. 2013) (“Duxbury II”) (internal 
quotation marks and citations omitted).                                   
To strike a balance between encouraging whistle-blowing and discouraging opportunistic 
behavior, the FCA contains a “public-disclosure bar.”  Id.  The public-disclosure bar seeks to 
“prevent parasitic qui tam actions in which relators, rather than bringing to light independently 
discovered information of fraud, simply feed off of previous disclosures of public fraud.”  United 
States ex rel. Duxbury v. Ortho Biotech Prods., L.P., 579 F.3d 13, 26 (1st Cir. 2009) (“Duxbury 
I”).                                                                      
The public-disclosure bar provides as follows:                       
The Court shall dismiss an action or claim under this section, unless opposed by 
the Government, if substantially the same allegations or transactions as alleged in 
the action or claim were publicly disclosed—                         

  i.  in a Federal criminal, civil, or administrative hearing in which the 
    Government or its agent is a party;                              

 ii.  in a congressional, Government Accountability Office, or other Federal 
    report, hearing, audit, or investigation; or                     

 iii.  from the news media,                                          

unless the action is brought by the Attorney General or the person bringing the 
action is an original source of the information.                     

31 U.S.C. § 3730(e)(4)(A).                                                
The public-disclosure bar of § 3730(e)(4)(A) applies when “(1) a public disclosure of the 
allegations or transactions in a relator's complaint . . . occurred; (2) said disclosure . . . occurred 
in the manner which is specified in the FCA; and (3) the relator’s suit [is] ‘based upon’ those 
publicly disclosed allegations or transactions.”  U.S. ex rel. Est. of Cunningham v. Millennium 
Lab’ys of Cal., Inc., 713 F.3d 662, 669-70 (1st Cir. 2013) (quoting Duxbury I, 579 F.3d at 21). 
A prior, public disclosure of fraud occurs when the essential elements exposing 
the particular transaction as fraudulent find their way into the public domain.  To 
be a disclosure of fraud the disclosure must contain either (1) a direct allegation of 
fraud, or (2) both a misrepresented state of facts and a true state of facts so that 
the listener or reader may infer fraud.                              

U.S. ex rel. Poteet v. Bahler Med., Inc., 619 F.3d 104, 110 (1st Cir. 2010) (internal quotation 
marks and citations omitted).                                             
The statute defines “original source” as an individual who, “[1] prior to a public 
disclosure . . . has voluntarily disclosed to the Government the information on which allegations 
or transactions in a claim are based, or (2) who has knowledge that is independent of and 
materially adds to the publicly disclosed allegations or transactions . . . .”  31 U.S.C. § 
3730(e)(4)(B).                                                            
Here, defendant contends that the allegations were previously disclosed in multiple ways, 
including a 2005 government investigation and a 2005 Corporate Integrity Agreement (“CIA”) 
between FMCNA and the Office of Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human 
Services (“OIG”).                                                         

     1.   Compensation of Medical Directors                          
Defendant contends that the allegations concerning the compensation of medical directors 
were publicly disclosed prior to the filing of the complaint.             
First, defendant contends that the salaries paid to all of its medical directors is a matter of 
public record and is available on the website of the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
(“CMS”).  While it is true that CMS data are “reports” for the purposes of the public disclosure 
bar, see U.S. ex rel. Conrad v. Abbott Lab’ys, Inc., No. 02-11738, 2013 WL 682740, at *5 (D. 
Mass. Feb. 25, 2013), the mere publication of compensation information, without an allegation 

of fraud or misrepresentation, is not sufficient to trigger the bar.      
Second, defendant contends that a complaint alleging medical-director fraud filed in 
Missouri in 2005 against two different companies—both of which were later acquired by 
FMCNA—qualified as a public disclosure barring the current allegations.2  Defendant further 
contends that the CIA it had entered into with the OIG relating to conduct of a company 
FMCNA later acquired (National Medical Care) qualified as a public disclosure. 
Those arguments, however, are unavailing.  The 2005 complaint alleged improper 
conduct dating from a decade before the conduct alleged here.  Furthermore, the defendants in 


2 The qui tam action at issue was United States ex rel. Williams v. Renal Care Grp., et al., No. 4:05-cv-985 
(E.D. Mo. June 21, 2005).                                                 
that case were entities that at the time were not affiliated with FMCNA.  Allegations concerning 
pre-merger conduct cannot be said to have disclosed post-merger conduct.  See U.S. ex rel. 
Saldivar v. Fresenius Med. Care Holdings, Inc., 906 F. Supp. 2d 1264, 1274 (N.D. Ga. 2012).    
Third, defendant contends that relevant public disclosures occurred in multiple SEC 
filings by FMCNA.  The SEC filings at issue state that (1) “at most of our clinics, a relatively 

small number of physicians account for the referral of all or a significant portion of the patient 
base,” (Def. Mem. Ex. 29 at 10); (2) “compensation is negotiated individually [based on] local 
factors . . . . We believe that the compensation of our medical directors is in line with the 
market” (Id. Ex. 13 at 23); and that (3) “If physicians and other referral sources cease referring 
patients to our dialysis clinics . . . our revenues would decrease.” (Id. Ex. 29 at 10).3   
In United States ex rel. CKD Project, LLC v. Fresenius Med. Care Holdings, Inc., 551 F. 
Supp. 3d 27, 43 (E.D.N.Y. 2021), the court found that SEC filings disclosing the nature of the 
joint-venture relationships and the regulatory risks associated with them were sufficient to 
qualify as public disclosures.  The following is a relevant excerpt from an SEC filing cited by the 

court in CKD:                                                             
A number of the dialysis centers . . . we operate are owned, or managed, by joint ventures 
in which we hold a controlling interest and one or more hospitals, physicians or physician 
practice groups hold a minority interest.  Physician owners, who are usually 
nephrologists, may also provide medical director services and physician owners may 
refer patients to those centers or other centers we own and operate or to other physicians 
who refer patients to those centers or other centers we own and operate.  While we have 
structured our joint ventures to comply with many of the criteria for safe harbor 
protection under the U.S. Federal Anti-Kickback Statute, our investments in these joint 
venture arrangements do not satisfy all elements of such safe harbor.  While we have 
established comprehensive compliance policies, procedures and programs to ensure 
ethical and compliant joint venture business operations, if one or more of our joint 
ventures were found to be in violation of the Anti-Kickback Statute or the Stark Law, we 

3 The Court takes judicial notice of the proffered SEC filings as undisputed documents provided by the 
parties in connection with a Rule 12(b)(6) motion based on the public-disclosure bar.  United States ex rel. 
Winkelman v. CVS Caremark Corp., 827 F.3d 201, 208 (1st Cir. 2016).       
could be required to restructure or terminate them.  We also could be required to repay to 
Medicare amounts received by the joint ventures pursuant to any prohibited referrals, and 
we could be subject to criminal and monetary penalties and exclusion from Medicare, 
Medicaid and other U.S. federal and state healthcare programs.       

(Def. Mem. Ex. 15 at 6).                                                  
That excerpt discloses that the joint ventures do not qualify for safe-harbor protection and 
identifies the penalties that might be imposed should the company be found to be in violation of 
the relevant statutes.  By contrast, here the statements in defendant’s securities filings concerning 
medical-director agreements do not even convey the possibility that those agreements might 
violate the law.  Furthermore, they do not directly disclose the existence of any of the alleged 
schemes, or any other form of fraud, nor do they describe facts from which the existence of a 
fraudulent scheme might be inferred.  At most, the filings describe a set of circumstances that 
might be vulnerable to manipulation.                                      
Accordingly, the public-disclosure bar does not preclude the claims concerning unlawful 
medical-director agreements.                                              
     2.   Joint-Venture Agreements                                   
The Court has previously determined that the portion of the amended complaint that 
alleges claims arising out of the joint-venture agreements and the provision of free services to 
physicians will be dismissed for failure to comply with the pre-suit requirements of the False 
Claims Act.  However, even assuming compliance with those requirements, the claims 
concerning joint-venture agreements would be barred in any event.  Relator first alleged fraud 
concerning joint ventures in the amended complaint, which was filed in 2021.  Therefore, the 
court may consider any public disclosures made prior to 2021 for purposes of determining 
whether the claims are prohibited by the public-disclosure bar.           
In 2014, a qui tam action was filed in the Eastern District of New York alleging that 
FMCNA “acquired controlling interests in dialysis clinics” and paid physician owners “above-
market value for their clinics and that this excess constituted payment to induce the doctors to 
refer patients back to these clinics.”  U.S. ex rel. CKD Project v. FMCNA, No. 14-cv-6646 
(E.D.N.Y. Nov. 12, 2014) (ECF No. 1).  In substance, the complaint alleged that FMCNA 
engaged in a scheme to pay kickbacks to physicians with whom it had entered into joint-venture 

agreements.  The matter was unsealed, and therefore publicly disclosed, in 2018.  The amended 
complaint in this case, which was the first time relator raised any allegations concerning joint 
ventures, was filed three years later, in 2021.                           
“In assessing whether a given later-filed suit is ‘based upon’ publicly disclosed 
allegations, [courts] look to whether those allegations are ‘substantially similar’ to said 
allegations.”  Cunningham, 713 F.3d at 670.  Here, the allegations are “substantially similar” to 
those in CKD and are thus “based upon” the public disclosures.            
However, even if allegations are based upon public disclosures, claims may nonetheless 
be asserted if the relator is an “original source.”  Before 2010, the statute defined an “original 

source” as “an individual who has direct and independent knowledge of the information on 
which the allegations are based and has voluntarily provided the information to the Government 
before filing an action under this section which is based on the information.”  31 U.S.C. § 
3730(e)(4)(B) (2006).  The 2010 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act amendment to the 
public-disclosure bar made two notable changes to that definition.  See Pub. L. No. 111-148, § 
10104(j)(2), 124 Stat. 119 (2010).  First, it added a second definition for “original source.”  Id.  
Now, a relator may also qualify as an “original source” if “prior to a public disclosure under 
subsection (e)(4)(a), [he] voluntarily disclosed to the Government the information on which 
allegations or transactions in a claim are based.”  Id.  Second, the requirement for “direct” 
knowledge was replaced with the requirement that a relator's knowledge must “materially add[ ] 
to the publicly disclosed allegations or transactions.”  Id.  Thus, the statute now defines “original 
source” as an individual who                                              
(1) prior to a public disclosure . . . has voluntarily disclosed to the Government 
the information on which allegations or transactions in a claim are based, or (2) 
who has knowledge that is independent of and materially adds to the publicly 
disclosed allegations or transactions, and who has voluntarily provided the 
information to the government before filing an action under this section. 

31 U.S.C. § 3730(e)(4)(B).                                                
The allegations in CKD described a scheme whereby FMCNA allegedly paid kickbacks 
to doctors with whom it had entered into joint-venture agreements.  Relator’s allegations here 
describe the same essential scheme and do not “materially add” to those allegations.  At most, 
relator “merely adds detail or color to previously disclosed elements of an alleged scheme 
[which] is not materially adding to the public disclosures.”  United States ex rel. Winkelman v. 
CVS Caremark Corp., 827 F.3d 201, 213 (1st Cir. 2016).                    
Accordingly, even if relator had complied with the pre-suit requirements of the False 
Claims Act, the public-disclosure bar would preclude the claims concerning joint-venture 
agreements.                                                               
C.   The First-to-File Bar                                           
Defendant also contends that the claims concerning joint-venture agreements are barred 
by the first-to-file rule.  Again, those claims will be dismissed on other grounds; however, even 
if those claims survived those challenges, they are duplicative of the allegations in CKD and 
therefore would be barred by the first-to-file rule.                      
The first-to-file bar provides that “[w]hen a person brings an action . . . no person other 
than the Government may intervene or bring a related action based on the facts underlying the 
pending action.”  31 U.S.C. § 3730(b)(5).  Defendant contends that the 2014 CKD complaint 
alleged the same fraudulent scheme concerning joint-venture agreements as the amended 
complaint here, which was filed seven years later.  Relator responds that (1) the complaints do 
not allege the same essential facts and (2) the CKD complaint was later dismissed on 
jurisdictional grounds, which makes the first-to-file bar inapplicable.   

The first question, for the purpose of applying the first-to-file bar, is whether the first-
filed complaint “contained all the essential facts of the fraud later alleged.”  United States v. 
Millenium Lab’ys, Inc., 923 F.3d 240, 252 (1st Cir. 2019) (cleaned up).  The objective of the 
essential facts test is to determine whether “the statutorily required threshold for notifying the 
government of the fraud alleged in the later-filed suit” has been met.  Id. at 253.  
The CKD complaint alleged that FMCNA used joint-venture agreements as a way to 
provide remuneration to physicians in exchange for referrals.  This is the same scheme with the 
same methodology as alleged here.  See United States ex rel. Wilson v. Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Inc., 750 F.3d 111, 118 (1st Cir. 2014); cf. Duxbury I, 579 F.3d at 33; United States ex rel. 

Westmoreland v. Amgen, 707 F. Supp. 2d 123, 130 (D. Mass. 2010).  Moreover, the CKD 
complaint alleged that the scheme was nationwide.  (CKD Compl. ¶¶ 28, 38-40, 60-65).  The 
CKD complaint therefore contained the essential facts alleged here, thus barring the allegations 
contained in the amended complaint.                                       
The second question is whether there is an exception to the first-to-file bar that would 
allow relator’s pre-2010 claims to survive.  Relator relies on the Sixth Circuit’s holding in United 
States ex rel. Poteet v. Medtronic, Inc., 552 F.3d 503, 516-17 (6th Cir. 2009) to support the 
contention that when a first-filed complaint is dismissed on jurisdictional grounds, it cannot bar a 
later-filed complaint.  However, the First Circuit has rejected the holding in Poteet, explaining 
that “earlier-filed complaints must provide only the essential facts to give the government 
sufficient notice to initiate an investigation into allegedly fraudulent practices” and emphasizing 
that “Section 3730(b)(5) contains no exceptions.”  United States ex rel. Heineman-Guta v. 
Guidant Corp., 718 F.3d 28, 35-37 (1st Cir. 2013).  The fact that the CKD complaint was 
dismissed on jurisdictional grounds is therefore irrelevant.              

Accordingly, the claims concerning joint-venture agreements are barred by the first-to-
file rule.                                                                
D.   Pleading Fraud with Particularity under Rule 9(b)               
     1.   Generally                                                  
Because the False Claims Act is a statute directed at fraudulent conduct, Rule 9(b) 
“requires both that the circumstances of the alleged fraud and the claims themselves be alleged 
with particularity.”  Lawton ex rel. United States v. Takeda Pharm. Co., Ltd., 842 F.3d 125, 130 
(1st Cir. 2016); Fed. R. Civ. P. 9(b).  The complaint must “set forth with particularity the who, 
what, when, where, and how of the alleged fraud.”  U.S. ex rel. Ge v. Takeda Pharm. Co. Ltd., 

737 F.3d 116, 123 (1st Cir. 2013) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).  Where the 
defendant allegedly caused a third party to submit a false claim to the government, rather than 
submitting the false claim itself, a “more flexible” standard applies, under which Rule 9(b) is 
satisfied by providing “factual or statistical evidence to strengthen the inference of fraud beyond 
possibility without necessarily providing details as to each false claim submitted.”  U.S. ex rel. 
Kelly v. Novartis Pharm. Co., 827 F.3d 5, 13 (1st Cir. 2016) (citing Duxbury I, 579 F.3d at 29).  
Rule 9(b) may be satisfied “where, although some questions remain unanswered, the complaint 
as a whole is sufficiently particular to pass muster under the FCA.”  U.S. ex rel. Gagne v. City of 
Worcester, 565 F.3d 40, 45 (1st Cir. 2009).                               
There is no “checklist of mandatory requirements that each allegation in a complaint 
must meet to satisfy Rule 9(b).”  Hagerty ex rel. United States v. Cyberonics, Inc., 844 F.3d 26, 
31 (1st Cir. 2016).  Nonetheless, the First Circuit has identified some examples of specific 
allegations that may suffice to state a claim with the requisite particularity.  In an FCA case, 
these may include “details concerning the dates of the claims, the content of the forms or bills 

submitted, their identification numbers, the amount of money charged to the government, the 
particular goods or services for which the government was billed, the individuals involved in the 
billing, and the length of time between the alleged fraudulent practices and the submission of 
claims based on those practices.”  U.S. ex rel. Karvelas v. Melrose-Wakefield Hosp., 360 F.3d 
220, 233 (1st Cir. 2004), abrogated on other grounds by Allison Engine Co. v. United States ex 
rel. Sanders, 553 U.S. 662 (2008).                                        
     2.   The Allegations of the Complaint                           
The amended complaint describes—in considerable detail—a multi-part scheme to 
compensate caregivers in return for referrals.  It identifies specific hospitals, doctors, and 

medical practices that have allegedly benefited financially from the scheme.   
However, general allegations of illegal or fraudulent practices, without more, are not 
sufficient to state a claim under the False Claims Act.  See Ge, 737 F.3d at 124 (stating that the 
court “reject[s][the] approach” sought by the relator, which was “a per se rule that if sufficient 
allegations of misconduct are made, it necessarily follows that false claims and/or material false 
information were filed”).  Rather, the complaint must allege both the existence of a scheme and 
the making of particular false claims resulting from the scheme.          
Here, the complaint describes in general terms how claims are submitted to Medicare and 
Medicaid; it describes the various ways in which FMCNA allegedly paid kickbacks for referrals; 
and as to each such aspect of the scheme, it alleges that “every” claim or “all” claims were 
fraudulent.                                                               
          a.   General Description of Medicare and Medicaid Claim Systems 
First, the complaint alleges in general terms that all claims for reimbursement made to 
Medicare require the submission of a Form UB-40 (or a substantially similar form) that contains 

“various data, including the patient’s identifying information and line items for each claim 
sought to be reimbursed.”  (Am. Compl. ¶ 29).  It includes a blank example of such a form as 
Exhibit A.  (Id. Ex. A).  It further alleges that defendant is required to submit on an annual basis 
a Form 265 cost report to Medicare that certifies, among other things, that the services identified 
in the report (that is, the dialysis services) were provided in compliance with federal law, 
including the Anti-Kickback Statute.  (Id. ¶¶ 30-31).                     
As to Medicaid, the complaint alleges in general terms that state administrators of the 
program obtain reimbursement from the federal government by submitting a quarterly Form 64 
to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services at Department of Health and Human 

Services.  (Id. ¶ 40).  According to the complaint, “[f]or this reason, claims submitted to the state 
Medicaid agencies are presented to the federal government within the meaning of the [False 
Claims Act].”  (Id.).                                                     
The complaint does not allege, even in general terms, how claims are submitted under the 
CHAMPUS/TRICARE or CHAMPVA programs.                                      
          b.   Description of False Claims                           
               (1)  Hospital Services                                
As set forth above, the complaint alleges that FMCNA provided dialysis services to 
hospitals at prices well below cost in order to capture referrals of discharged patients to its 
dialysis clinics.  (Id. ¶ 83).  After describing that scheme in some detail, the complaint alleges the 
following as to the submission of actual false claims:                    
Fresenius’[s] below-cost acute dialysis services constitute illegal remuneration to 
hospitals, as those services relieved the hospitals of financial obligations they 
otherwise would have incurred in providing inpatient treatment to ESRD patients 
and were provided as an illegal inducement for referrals to its outpatient clinics, in 
violation of the AKS.  Any claims submitted for services Fresenius rendered to the 
patients who were referred to Fresenius clinics through the operation of this 
scheme are false claims within the meaning of the FCA.               

(Id. ¶ 127) (emphasis added).                                             
The complaint also provides a somewhat more complete description of the false claims 
for services allegedly provided to Scripps Health, “a large health care system with five hospitals 
in San Diego, California.”  (Id. ¶ 154).  As to Scripps, it alleges the following: 
At an average of three treatments per week per patient, those 172 additional 
patients (whose treatments were paid for by Federal health care programs) 
received some 26,832 treatments each year.  Because the average dialysis patient 
stays in treatment for at least five years, the total value of these additional 
referrals to Fresenius during a five-year period from this single hospital system 
exceeded an estimated $30 million.  Every claim for reimbursement associated 
with treating these patients that was submitted to Federal health care programs 
was tainted by kickbacks and constituted a false claim.              

(Id. ¶ 165) (emphasis added).                                             
               (2)  Medical Director Compensation                    
The complaint further alleges, at considerable length, a scheme to pay medical directors 
compensation above fair market value in order to induce referrals.  As to the submission of false 
claims, it makes the following general allegations:                       
. . . Fresenius’[s] compensation of its medical directors cannot be explained by 
competition or market forces.  The difference is also not explained by differing 
duties and responsibilities, because the duties of dialysis clinic medical directors 
are defined by uniform federal regulations.  Instead, at least one (if not the only) 
reason Fresenius pays its medical directors so far above FMV is in order to secure 
referrals.  At least in part because of receiving this above-FMV compensation 
from Fresenius, the medical directors for the foregoing facilities and in the 
foregoing cities have referred patients to Fresenius facilities, the majority of 
whose care was paid for by Federal health care programs.  Every claim submitted 
to these programs for reimbursement was tainted by kickbacks and thus 
constitutes a false claim under the FCA.                             

(Id. ¶ 204) (emphasis added).                                             

The physicians who had entered into MDAs referred patients to Fresenius 
facilities based at least in part on remuneration from Fresenius, and these 
facilities submitted claims to Federal health care programs for      
reimbursement associated with the treatment of these patients.  All such 
claims, which were tainted by kickbacks, were false.                 

(Id. ¶ 229) (emphasis added).                                             
The complaint also describes the compensation paid to a number of specific medical 
directors around the United States.  (Id. ¶¶ 232-35 (Diablo Nephrology in California); id. ¶¶ 236-
41 (Balboa Nephrology Medical Group in California); id. ¶¶ 242-55 (NANI in Illinois); id. ¶¶ 
256-69 (IMN and other practices in Indiana); id. ¶¶ 270-84 (ENA and other practices in North 
Carolina); id. ¶¶ 285-91 (practices in Texas); id. ¶¶ 292-307 (practices in Washington state)).  As 
to each, it provides some specifics as to the scheme (such as referral trends and medical-director 
compensation levels).  It then alleges, in general terms, that “all” claims from those facilities 
were “tainted by kickbacks” and therefore constitute false claims within the meaning of the False 
Claims Act.  (Id. ¶ 233 (Diablo Nephrology) (“Every claim for reimbursement [FMCNA] 
submitted to [f]ederal health care programs associated with the treatment of these patients was 
tainted by kickbacks and therefore false within the meaning of the FCA.”); id. ¶ 238 (Balboa 
Nephrology Medical Group) (“Every claim . . . constitutes a false claim.”); id. ¶ 249 (NANI) 
(“All . . . claims . . . constituted false claims . . . .”); id. ¶ 257 (Indiana) (“All such claims . . . were 
false . . . .”); id. ¶ 274 (North Carolina) (“[E]ach of these claims was false . . . .”); id. ¶ 284 
(North Carolina) (“All such claims . . . were false.”); id. ¶ 286 (Texas) (“All such claims . . . were 
false . . . .”); id. ¶ 293 (Washington state) (“All such claims . . . were false . . . .”); id. ¶ 299 
(Washington state) (“All such claims . . . were false.”); id. ¶ 304 (Washington state) (“All such 
claims . . . were false.”) (emphasis added)).                             
As to some of those medical practices, the complaint provides some amount of additional 
detail, although again it does not describe any specific false claims.    
As to Diablo Nephrology, the complaint alleges the following:        

In return for these lucrative remuneration relationships, Diablo Nephrology 
referred patients to Fresenius clinics, much of whose treatment was paid for by 
Federal health care programs.  As of August 31, 2012, for example, Diablo 
Nephrology had 585 patients in dialysis at various Fresenius facilities (including 
home dialysis patients), out of which only 6.9% were commercial pay patients.  
The Diablo patients accounted for a total of 104,731 treatments, over 95,000 of 
which were billed to Federal payers at an average rate of approximately $230 per 
treatment, or more than $21,000,000 in Medicare reimbursement per year to 
Fresenius.  Every claim for reimbursement for the treatment of these patients 
constitutes a false claim.  Diablo Nephrology contributed $4,395,000 to 
Fresenius’ EBIT in 2012.  Every claim for reimbursement Fresenius submitted to 
Federal health care programs associated with the treatment of these patients was 
tainted by kickbacks and therefore false within the meaning of the FCA. 

(Id. ¶ 233) (emphasis added).                                             
As to Balboa Nephrology Medical Group, it alleges the following:     
As of 2013, Balboa physicians had referred 2,175 patients for dialysis at Fresenius 
facilities, an increase of 274 dialysis patients over the previous year.  Fresenius’ 
internal tracking documents show that Balboa’s commercial mix was 10.5%, 
which means that over 1,900 of the patients that Balboa referred to Fresenius 
clinics were beneficiaries of Federal health benefit programs such as Medicare 
and Medicaid, whose care was paid for by these programs.  Every claim for 
reimbursement for the treatment of these patients constitutes a false claim. 

(Id. ¶ 238) (emphasis added).                                             
As to NANI, the complaint provides a table of Medicare and Medicaid revenue for a 
period of five years at seventeen dialysis centers in the Chicago area.  (Id. ¶¶ 247-48).  It then 
alleges:                                                                  
All of the Medicare and Medicaid claims submitted to these Federal health plans 
were tainted by the kickbacks Fresenius paid to NANI, which were illegal 
remuneration to secure referrals, and violated the AKS.  As such, they constituted 
false claims under the FCA.                                          

(Id. ¶ 249) (emphasis added).                                             
Similarly, for North Carolina, the complaint provides a table of Medicaid (but not 
Medicare) revenue for a period of six years at fourteen dialysis centers.  (Id. ¶ 272).  It then 
provides a table of patients and patient treatments for the same facilities over the same time 
period.  (Id. ¶ 273).  It then alleges:                                   
Fresenius submitted each of the foregoing hundreds of thousands of claims for 
reimbursement to Medicaid on approximately 45,756 occasions (3,813 patients x 
12 submissions annually).  When Fresenius submitted each claim, it impliedly 
certified that the corresponding treatments complied with the AKS.  However, all 
of these treatments were tainted by kickbacks in the form of above-FMV medical 
director compensation, at least one purpose of which was to induce referrals to 
Fresenius clinics.  Accordingly, each of these claims was false within the meaning 
of the FCA.                                                          

(Id. ¶ 274) (emphasis added).                                             
The complaint does not, however, identify a single specific false claim submitted in 
connection with any of those dialysis centers.                            
               (3)  Favorable Leases                                 
The complaint further alleges a scheme to provide favorable leases to physician groups in 
order to induce referrals.  As to the claims arising from that scheme, the complaint alleges the 
following:                                                                
Through the actions alleged above, including the payment of above-FMV rents 
and provision of below-FMV leases to physicians in order to induce and secure 
referrals, Fresenius violated the AKS.  Through these practices, Fresenius 
essentially paid physicians for referrals, payments that violate the AKS.  All 
claims submitted for services Fresenius rendered to the patients who were referred 
to Fresenius clinics through the operation of this scheme are false claims within 
the meaning of the FCA.                                              

(Id. ¶ 331) (emphasis added).                                             
               (4)  Other Aspects of the Scheme                      
As set forth above, the allegations of the complaint concerning joint-venture agreements, 
free services to hospitals and patients, and free practice-management services to physicians will 
be dismissed for failure to comply with the notification and other requirements of the False 
Claims Act.  In any event, as to those aspects of the alleged scheme, the allegations of the 

submission of false claims are similarly general.                         
As to joint-venture agreements, the complaint again alleges in general terms that “all” 
claims submitted by facilities with joint-venture partners are false claims. 
Not only did Fresenius intentionally enter into JVAs in which its nephrologist 
partners had greater than forty percent ownership interests, but Fresenius knows, 
and expects, that the vast majority of revenue for its JV facilities will come from 
patients referred by these partners.  A significant number of the ESRD patients 
treated at these facilities were beneficiaries of Federal health care programs, for 
whose treatment the facilities submitted claims for reimbursement.  Because 
Fresenius entered into these JVAs based at least in part to induce nephrologists to 
refer patients to its own clinics, and intentionally violated the strictures set forth in 
42 C.F.R. §§ 1001.952(a)(2)(i) & 1001.952(a)(2)(vi), all of these claims violated 
the AKS and constitute false claims within the meaning of the FCA.   

(Id. ¶ 350) (emphasis added).4                                            
As to the alleged scheme to provide other services to hospitals, the complaint alleges the 
following:                                                                
Through the circumstances alleged above, including the provision of services at 
below cost and at no cost to hospitals in order to induce referrals to its outpatient 
clinics, Fresenius violated the AKS, which prohibits the payment of remuneration 
to secure referrals.  Through these practices, Fresenius essentially paid hospitals 
to secure referrals, in violation of the AKS.  Any claims submitted for services 
Fresenius rendered to the patients who were referred to Fresenius clinics through 
the operation of this scheme are false claims within the meaning of the FCA. 


4 The complaint goes on to identify four specific sets of joint-venture arrangements (Balboa, NANI, ENA, 
and Dallas Nephrology Associates) and again alleges that “all claims” submitted in connection with patients treated 
by those physicians or facilities were “tainted by kickbacks” and therefore false.  (Am. Compl. ¶¶ 353, 357 
(Balboa); id. ¶ 359 (NANI); id. ¶ 360 (ENA); id. ¶ 361 (Dallas Nephrology Associates)). 
(Id. ¶ 166) (emphasis added).                                             
As to the scheme to provide free or below-cost practice-management services, the 
complaint alleges the following:                                          
Through the valuable free practice management services provided to physicians 
they would otherwise have to pay themselves, Fresenius violated the AKS, which 
prohibits the payment of remuneration to secure referrals.  All claims Fresenius 
submitted for services Fresenius rendered to the patients who were referred to 
Fresenius clinics through the operation of this practice management scheme are 
false claims within the meaning of the FCA.                          

(Id. ¶ 320) (emphasis added).                                             
     3.   Analysis                                                   
As noted, despite its length and detail, the description of the fraudulent scheme set out in 
the complaint, without more, is insufficient to state a claim under the False Claims Act.  There 
must be particularized allegations of claims for payment arising from that scheme.  “Evidence of 
an actual false claim is the sine qua non of a False Claims Act violation.”  Karvelas, 360 F.3d at 
225.  And under Rule 9(b), those claims must be described with some level of specificity.  See id. 
at 233.   The question here is whether the complaint has met that standard. 
To begin, it appears—although the complaint is ambiguous at times—that the Medicare 
claims at issue were submitted to the federal government by FMCNA itself, and that the 
Medicaid claims were submitted by various state government agencies based on claims that 
FMCNA submitted to those agencies.5  As to the Medicare claims, therefore, the complaint must 
be evaluated according to the ordinary standard applicable in False Claims Act cases, not the 
“more flexible” standard applicable where the defendant allegedly caused a third party to submit 
false claims.  See Kelly, 827 F.3d at 13.  For the sake of simplicity, the Court will focus first on 

5 Among other things, the complaint uses the passive voice throughout:  claims “were submitted,” rather 
than “FMCNA submitted claims.”                                            
the Medicare claims.6                                                     
In substance, the complaint alleges the FMCNA created a nationwide scheme to pay 
unlawful kickbacks for referrals at all of its outpatient dialysis facilities; that all claims submitted 
for all dialysis services are therefore tainted by kickbacks; and that therefore every claim 
submitted by FMCNA during the relevant period was false.  If relator is correct, that means that 

the entire government-payor business of FMCNA—which appears to amount to more than $10 
billion in revenue per year—is based on fraud.  And it means that relator stands to reap a reward 
of 15%-30% of any recovery—an amount that might well be measured in tens of billions of 
dollars.                                                                  
There is, of course, considerable logic to relator’s arguments:  if 100% of the business of 
FMCNA is tainted by kickbacks, and if 80% or more of the business of FMCNA involves 
government payors, it follows that FMCNA must have submitted many false claims.  But 
whatever the merits of that argument may be, the law requires more.  See Kelly, 827 F.3d at 15 
(“It may not be irrational to infer that, given [the allegations of the fraudulent scheme], some 

false claims . . . for reimbursement were submitted to the government.  But this is not enough to 
satisfy Rule 9(b).”).                                                     
Again, the complaint does not identify a single specific false claim—by Form UB-40, by 
patient name, by date, by location, by dollar amount, by billing code, by type of service, or 
otherwise.  Nor does it provide any representative or sample claims.7     
Complicating matters further is the nature of the alleged false claims.  There is no 


6 As noted, there are no allegations at all concerning the payments of claims under the 
CHAMPUS/TRICARE or CHAMPVA programs.                                      
7 That may, in part, be a result of the fact that relator did not work in any financial or billing capacity, but 
rather worked as the Director of Acute Market Development for the Fresenius Western Business Unit, and 
negotiated contracts between FMCNA and hospitals for in-patient dialysis treatment.  (Am. Compl. ¶ 11). 
contention that any dialysis services performed were medically unnecessary or excessive, or that 
those services were performed in a substandard manner.  Nor is there any contention that any 
dialysis services that were paid by Medicare in fact should have been paid by a private payor.  
Based on the allegations of the complaint, it appears that all of the patients in question would 
have received treatment at a facility operated by FMCNA or a competitor, and all of those 

treatments would have been paid by Medicare regardless.  It appears, therefore, that the 
government may have suffered little or no actual financial loss.  The entire basis of the complaint 
is a theory of tainted referrals; kickbacks paid by FMCNA tainted the physician-referral process, 
which enabled the company to obtain, unlawfully, a larger share of referrals than it would have 
otherwise in a properly functioning market.                               
It is true that a violation of the Anti-Kickback Statute “that results in a federal health care 
payment is a per se false claim.”  Guilfoile, 913 F.3d at 190.  It does not follow, however, that 
where there is an AKS violation, the requirement of establishing a false claim evaporates.  One 
problem lies in the phrase “results in”—that is, the requirement of causation.  Suppose, for 

example, that in a world free from kickbacks, 25% of the dialysis services business of FMCNA 
would have been captured by competitors.  Rule 9(b) requires that a relator plausibly allege that 
specific payments concerning specific patients were caused by the AKS violation—that is, that 
they were part of the 25% of the claims that resulted from a violation, not the 75% that were not.  
Relator here has not attempted to do so.                                  
Certainly it would not be irrational to conclude that the presence of kickbacks taints the 
entire payment process, so that 100% of the claims may be deemed to have been caused by the 
violation.  No published case in the First Circuit, however, has ever gone so far.  It might also be 
entirely rational to shift the burden to the defendant:  that is, once a relator has established the 
existence of a kickback scheme, arguably the burden should be shifted to the defendant to prove 
that certain referrals were not caused by payment of kickbacks.  Again, however, no case, to the 
Court’s knowledge, has ever established such a procedure.                 
In any event, as noted, the complaint does not include a single allegation concerning a 
single specific false claim.  To avoid dismissal, the complaint must therefore establish the 

necessary degree of particularity, if at all, through allegations of “factual or statistical evidence 
that strengthen[ ] the inference of fraud on the government beyond a mere possibility.”  Duxbury 
I, 579 F.3d at 29.                                                        
To the extent the complaint here provides any factual or statistical evidence as to the 
actual false claims, it does so by alleging in a handful of instances that certain types of claims 
associated with patients at certain facilities were false.  The complaint alleges that certain 
medical practices, such as Diablo and Balboa, benefited financially from medical-director 
agreements and joint-venture agreements with FMCNA, that in return they referred patients to 
FMCNA facilities, and as a result all of their claims for government reimbursement were false.  

Each step in that argument relies on an inference:  first, the inference that the relevant financial 
arrangements were intended as kickbacks; second, the inference that every referral to an 
FMCNA clinic was made as a result of the kickbacks; and third, the inference that every claim 
for government reimbursement was tainted by the kickbacks.  But nowhere does the complaint 
identify a specific physician who made a specific referral as a result of a specific unlawful 
practice that resulted in a specific false claim.  In substance, it is a dressed-up version of a 
generalized allegation:  it essentially alleges that if a practice benefited financially from a 
relationship with FMCNA, and if it administered 104,000 treatments, and 93% of those were to 
patients who were beneficiaries of government-sponsored healthcare programs, then it submitted 
96,720 false claims.  That is not sufficient, under the case law, to state a false claim with 
particularity within the meaning of Rule 9(b).                            
To be clear, the dispositive question is not whether FMCNA engaged in an illegal and 
pervasive scheme to pay kickbacks for referrals.  For present purposes, the Court must assume 
that it did.  Nor is the issue whether the scheme should, in some fashion, be redressed.  The 

government had an opportunity to intervene if it chose, and elected not to do so.  And, 
presumably, it has other weapons in its arsenal for dealing with fraudulent conduct.  The critical 
question is whether the complaint meets the exacting standard for FCA claims required by law.  
Under the circumstances, the Court concludes that it does not.            
In summary, the amended complaint fails to state allegations of fraud under the FCA with 
the particularity required by Rule 9(b).  Accordingly, the motion to dismiss will be granted. 
E.   Conspiracy                                                      
Because the complaint does not state allegations of fraud under the FCA with the 
particularity required by Rule 9(b), the conspiracy claim under the FCA must fail as well. 

V.   Conclusion                                                           
For the foregoing reasons, defendant’s motion to dismiss is GRANTED. 
So Ordered.                                                               
                           /s/ F. Dennis Saylor IV                   
                           F. Dennis Saylor IV                       
Dated:  December 2, 2022        Chief Judge, United States District Court