UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            

                   DISTRICT OF MAINE                                 


HOSPITAL QUIRURGICA DEL SUR   )                                           
                         )                                           
     Plaintiff,          )                                           
                         )                                           
v.                       )         No. 2:23-CV-00259-LEW             
                         )                                           
MARTIN’S POINT HEALTH CARE,   )                                           
INC.,                         )                                           
                         )                                           
     Defendant.          )                                           

        ORDER ON MOTION TO ALTER JUDGMENT                            

Plaintiff Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur seeks to recover the costs of medical services 
that it provided to a patient in Mexico from Defendant Martin’s Point Health Care, Inc.  I 
previously granted Defendant’s Motion to Dismiss because Plaintiff did not exhaust its 
administrative remedies.  Order on Motion to Dismiss (ECF No. 29).  The matter is before 
the Court on Plaintiff’s Motion to Alter Judgment (ECF No. 31).  Because Plaintiff has not 
demonstrated that the judgment of dismissal resulted from a manifest error of law, the 
Motion is DENIED.                                                         
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 59(e) “permits an attack on a judgment on the 
ground that the judgment is based on a manifest error of law.”  Venegas-Hernandez v. 
Sonolux Recs., 370 F.3d 183, 189 (1st Cir. 2004).                         
Plaintiff argues that this case was erroneously dismissed because it is a foreign 
provider of medical services and thus not able to access the administrative review process.  
Mot. at 2.  In support, Plaintiff references the Fifth Circuit’s decision in RenCare, Ltd. v. 
Humana Health Plan of Texas, Inc., 395 F.3d 555 (5th Cir. 2004), and observes “that a 

provider’s direct claim against an insurer may not be subject to Medicare’s administrative 
review.”  Mot. at 3.  In RenCare, the payment “dispute [was] solely between Humana and 
RenCare” based on their “privately-agreed-to payment plan.”  395 F.3d at 558.  Because 
the parties had a private contract, the payment dispute was not “inextricably intertwined 
with a claim for Medicare benefits,” so the exhaustion requirement did not apply.  Id. at 
557–58.1  Because this case does not involve a contract, RenCare is distinguishable.  See 

Tenet Healthsystem GB, Inc. v. Care Improvement Plus S. Cent. Ins. Co., 875 F.3d 584, 
591 (11th Cir. 2017) (explaining that “Medicare regulations treat noncontract providers 
differently  than  contract  providers”  by  permitting  contract  providers  and  Medicare 
Advantage Organizations (“MAOs”) to define the terms of their agreements). 
Plaintiff also argues that “[s]ince foreign medical providers are neither contracting 

nor non-contracting parties as those phrases are used in [Center for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services’ (CMS)] nomenclature, they cannot be part of an administrative review process 


1 Plaintiff quotes an amicus brief filed by the United States Department of Health and Human Services in 
which it argued “‘that third-party contract providers (rather than noncontract providers . . .) are not 
assignees’ within the definition of Medicare’s administrative exhaustion provisions.”  Sarasota Cnty. Pub. 
Hosp. Bd. v. Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Fla., Inc.  511 F. Supp. 3d 1240, 1252 (M.D. Fla. 2021) (ellipses 
in original) (quoting Tenet Healthsystem GB, Inc. v. Care Improvement Plus S. Cent. Ins. Co., 875 F.3d 
584, 590 (11th Cir. 2017)).  As explained by the Eleventh Circuit, this argument overlooks the “critical” 
distinction “between contract providers and noncontract providers.”  Tenet Healthsystem, 875 F.3d at 590.  
When there is a billing dispute between a MAO and a contract provider, the provider is only pursuing a 
claim for reimbursement that belonged to itself under the contract, so its claim is not inextricably 
intertwined with a claim for Medicare benefits.  See id.  But when a hospital agrees to treat Medicare 
enrollees and agrees to hold those enrollees harmless for any costs incurred in connection with their medical 
treatments, the hospital “stand[s] in the shoes of the enrollees,” so it must comply with the exhaustion 
requirement to assert an enrollees’ claims.  Id. at 589.                  
such as the providers in the cases the Court relie[d] upon.”  Mot. at 4.  This checks off the 
lawyerly rhetoric box, but Plaintiff has not supported its argument with any case law.  

Instead, Plaintiff has offered the affidavit of Eindar M. Khant, the CEO of Passage Health 
International, Inc.  Mot. Ex. 1 at 1–2.  He states that CMS has “flatly rejected [appeals,] 
stating that it does not handle, remedy or adjudicate claims between any MAO and any 
foreign medical provider.”  Id. at 1.  Khant further explains that “[f]oreign medical 
providers cannot be either contracting or non-contracting parties in the CMS vocabulary 
since they cannot participate in Medicare since they are outside of the USA.”  Id.  In 

support, Plaintiff attached two emails capturing exchanges between other foreign medical 
providers and CMS in which CMS has purportedly rejected appeal requests.  Id. at 10–17. 
Plaintiff’s argument confounds the grievance process with the distinct appeals 
process for payment disputes.  The grievance process is reserved for “complaint[s] or 
dispute[s],  other  than  one  that  constitutes  an  organization  determination,  expressing 

dissatisfaction with any aspect of an MA organization’s or provider’s operations, activities, 
or behavior, regardless of whether remedial action is requested.”  42 C.F.R. § 422.561 
(emphasis added).  Organization determinations encompass the “MA organization’s refusal 
to  provide  or  pay  for  services,  in  whole  or  in  part.”    42  C.F.R.  § 422.566(b)(3).  
Accordingly, Plaintiff’s payment dispute entails an organizational determination, and it is 

subject to “mandatory administrative ‘appeals procedures.’”  RenCare, 395 F.3d at 559 
(first citing 42 U.S.C. § 1395w-22(g); and then citing 42 C.F.R. §§ 422.560–422.622).  
Indeed, one of Plaintiff’s proffered email exchanges references this appeals process.  See 
Mot Ex. 1 at 9.                                                           
In sum, Plaintiff has not demonstrated that the judgment of dismissal rested on a 
manifest error of law.  Thus, Plaintiff’s Motion to Alter Judgment (ECF No. 31) is 

DENIED.                                                                   
SO ORDERED.                                                               
Dated this 12th day of August, 2024.                                 
                              /s/ Lance E. Walker                    
                              Chief U.S. District Judge

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            

                       DISTRICT OF MAINE                                 


HOSPITAL QUIRURGICA DEL SUR,  )                                           
                             )                                           
         Plaintiff,          )                                           
                             )                                           
    v.                       )         No. 2:23-CV-00259-LEW             
                             )                                           
MARTIN’S POINT HEALTH CARE,   )                                           
INC.,                         )                                           
                             )                                           
         Defendant.          )                                           

                 ORDER ON MOTION TO DISMISS                              

    In this action, Plaintiff Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur seeks to recover from Defendant 
Martin’s Point, in its capacity as a healthcare insurer, the value of healthcare services it 
provided  to  an  individual  who  participates  in  Martin’s  Point’s  Medicare  Part  C  or 
“Medicare Advantage” program.  The matter is before the Court on Martin’s Point’s 
Motion to Dismiss (ECF No. 19).  For reasons that follow, the Motion is GRANTED. 
                          BACKGROUND                                     
    Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur is a Mexican corporation that provides hospital and 
healthcare services to patients in Cancun, Mexico.  From January 12, 2023, to February 16, 
2023, James G. Taliaferro was voluntarily admitted to Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur.  Upon 
his admission to Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur and during his hospitalization, Taliaferro 
signed a written contract acknowledging that he would be responsible for paying all monies 
owed to the provider and/or billing administrator and provided information about his 
applicable health insurance with Martin’s Point Health Care, Inc., a Maine corporation with 
its principal place of business in Portland, Maine.                       

    Non-party Passage Health International LLC is a limited liability company with a 
principal  place  of  business  in  Fort  Lauderdale,  Florida.    Passage  performed  billing 
submission, pre-authorization, and collection activities on behalf of Hospital Quirurgica 
Del Sur.  Throughout Taliaferro’s inpatient stay at Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur, Passage 
communicated  with  and  received  verification  from  Martin’s  Point  that  the  proposed 
medical procedures in Mexico were covered by insurance provided by Martin’s Point and 

that Taliaferro had applicable benefits for out of country emergency services.  After 
receiving such assurances, Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur treated Taliaferro and he was 
eventually released.                                                      
    Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur alleges that the services it provided to Taliaferro total 
$512,464.00.  Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur’s medical bills incurred on behalf of Taliaferro 

were  provided  to  Martin’s  Point  but  Martin’s  Point  refused  to  reimburse  Hospital 
Quirurgica Del Sur except to the limit of $25,000.00.  That amount is the maximum benefit 
for out-of-country medical services specified in Mr. Taliaferro’s Medicare Part C health 
insurance contract  with Martin’s Point.  Hospital Quirurgica  Del  Sur complains that 
Martin’s Point never advised it of the existence of a $25,000.00 limitation even though 

Martin’s Point informed Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur that Taliaferro’s medical treatment 
in Mexico was covered by insurance with Martin’s Point.  More specifically, Hospital 
Quirurgica Del Sur alleges that it worked with Passage Health to verify coverage and 
Passage  Heath  had  communications  with  Martin’s  Point,  who  made  assurances  that 
Taliaferro’s  proposed  medical  procedures  in  Mexico  were  covered  by  its  medical 
insurance.                                                                

    Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur’s Complaint asserts two causes of action: promissory 
estoppel  and  negligent  misrepresentation.    As  to  the  latter  cause  of  action,  Hospital 
Quirurgica Del Sur alleges that Martin’s Point supplied false information that guided 
Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur in its business transactions relating to Mr. Taliaferro, to its 
detriment.  Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur does not allege, specifically, that there was a 
conversation  with  Martin’s  Point  concerning  the  existence  of  insurance  coverage 

limitations, but states that Martin’s Point informed Passage Health that Taliaferro had “full 
medical insurance benefits.”  Compl. ¶ 29.                                
    In support of its Motion to Dismiss, Martin’s Point provides a letter exhibit.  Mot. 
Ex. A (ECF No. 19-1).  The letter is authored by Martin’s Point HealthCare and authorizes 
inpatient service for Mr. Taliaferro for several days.  The letter also states that the approval 

is subject to Medicare coding requirements for coverage and includes a code for CMS 
approval.  The letter  also concludes, in bold, that PAYMENT IS BASED ON THE 
MEMBER’S ELIGIBILITY AND BENEFIT COVERAGE AT THE TIME OF SERVICE.         
Id.  Martin’s Point asserts that it is proper to consider the exhibit in the context of a motion 
to dismiss because the authorization verification form is “integral to the claims in the 

complaint.”  Mot. at 5 n.5 (citing Brayman v. Porter, No. 1:20-cv-00169-JAW, 2021 WL 
342566 (D. Me. 2021)).  The letter bears the date January 30, 2023, which is roughly half-
way through Mr. Taliaferro’s hospitalization.                             
    In  response  to  Martin’s  Point’s  Motion,  Hospital  Quirurgica  Del  Sur  supplies 
exhibits of its own.  These include a Passage Health Verification of Benefits form dated 

January 18, 2023, shortly after Taliaferro’s hospitalization.  Response Ex. A (ECF No. 27-
1).  The documents do not appear to proclaim that Martin’s Point is a Medicare Part C 
insurer, though there is a reference to “Medicare coding requirements” in at least one letter 
authored by Martin’s Point.                                               
    Because the exhibits are integral to the communications between Martin’s Point and 
Passage Health, and because those communications underlie Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur’s 

causes of action, and because neither party disputes the authenticity of the documents, I 
have considered the documents in the context of the Motion to Dismiss, without converting 
the motion into a motion for summary judgment.  See Goldberg v. Unum Life Ins. Co. of 
Am., 527 F. Supp. 2d 164, 167 (D. Me. 2007).1                             
                           DISCUSSION                                    

    Pursuant to Rule 12(b)(1), a defendant may file a motion to dismiss contending that 
the court lacks jurisdiction over the subject matter of the litigation.  Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(1).  
The burden to prove the existence of subject matter jurisdiction rests with the party 
invoking the court’s jurisdiction.  Skwira v. United States, 344 F.3d 64, 71 (1st Cir. 2003).  
For claims arising under the Medicare Act, which uses the same exhaustion requirement as 

the Social Security Act, the failure to exhaust administrative remedies provides a basis for 

1 This observation is offered only in an abundance of caution.  In a Rule 12(b)(1) motion, “[t]he court, 
without conversion, may consider extrinsic materials and, to the extent it engages in jurisdictional 
factfinding, is free to test the truthfulness of the plaintiffs allegations.”  Dynamic Image Techs., Inc. v. 
United States, 221 F.3d 34, 37 (1st Cir. 2000).                           
the dismissal of a district court action on jurisdictional grounds.  Justiniano v. Soc. Sec. 
Admin., 876 F.3d 14, 19 (1st Cir. 2017); United States v. Lahey Clinic Hosp., Inc., 399 F.3d 

1, 7–8 & n.6 (1st Cir. 2005).                                             
    Martin’s Point argues that Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur’s causes of action cannot be 
maintained in this Court at this time and should be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction 
because federal law requires that Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur exhaust administrative 
remedies before filing a complaint seeking judicial review of its dispute with Martin’s 
Point.  Mot. at 7–13.  Martin’s Point’s argument rests on its status as a Medicare Advantage 

organization (“MAO”), the fact that Mr. Taliaferro was insured by Martin’s Point under 
Part C of the Medicare Act, and the fact that Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur’s civil action is 
based on alleged misrepresentations concerning the availability of insurance benefits. 
    In response, Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur relies on the notion that it has plausibly 
plead garden variety state law claims arising in diversity.  Opposition at 1–2, 4–8.  Hospital 

Quirurgica Del Sur also asserts that “Martin’s Point is applying inappropriate standards in 
asserting  that  the  foreign  hospital  fails  to  comply  with  administrative  requirements 
[because Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur] is . . . a non-Medicare, non-contracted provider, a 
distinction from a non-contracted provider within the United States”; Martin’s Point “is 
free to offer services for out-of-network international claims for emergency services”; and 

Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur “properly alleged that they did so here and later reneged on . . . 
representations that coverage was available.”  Id. at 5.  In its view, emergency overseas 
benefits “are not governed by Medicare” and, therefore, a foreign hospital “cannot enter 
into a contract with any Medicare Advantage Organization.”  Id. at 5–6.   
    For reasons that follow, I am not persuaded by Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur that 
Martin’s Point is “free” to provide whatever coverage it desires for international emergency 

service and that disputes concerning such benefits fall outside the Medicare program. 
    The Medicare program is a federal welfare benefit program that provides health 
insurance coverage to, among others, people 65 years of age and older.  Medicaid & 
Medicare Advantage Prods. Ass’n of Puerto Rico, Inc. v. Emanuelli Hernández, 58 F.4th 
5, 8 (1st Cir. 2023) (citing 42 U.S.C. § 1395c).  Parts A and B of the Medicare Act afford 
medical benefits according to a fee-for-service schedule established by the Centers for 

Medicare and Medicaid Services (“CMS”), a sub-agency of the Department of Health and 
Human Services.  Id.  Part C of the Medicare Act establishes a Medicare Advantage 
program through which CMS contracts with private insurers that then develop their own 
networks of care to deliver both mandated Medicare benefits and some supplemental 
benefits that are not available under Parts A and B of Medicare.  Id.  The payment system 

under Part C differs from the fee-for-service schedule of Parts A and B, and generally 
entails a mash-up of market, welfare, and managed care attributes that, it is said, resemble 
a market-oriented approach to the delivery of healthcare services.  Id. & n.1.  Nonetheless, 
the provision of Part C benefits and disputes over payments remain very much within the 
Medicare program.                                                         

    Persons who enroll in a plan offered by a MAO pay for supplemental benefits by 
means of premiums or cost sharing.  42 C.F.R. §§ 422.110(c)(2), 422.102(c).  Although 
“CMS generally has little say over the package of supplemental benefits that a plan chooses 
to offer,” MAOs’ plans are subject to a battery of rules and standards and CMS must 
approve all supplemental benefits included in a plan offered by a MAO.  42 U.S.C. 
§§ 1395w-26(b), 1395w-27(a); 42 C.F.R. § 422.110(f).  The approval process includes a 

review to ensure the MAOs meet financial solvency and capital adequacy standards.  42 
U.S.C. § 1395w-26(a).  Typically, MAOs arrange for the provision of healthcare services 
to their enrollees by means of contract providers or managed care networks.  However, 
Medicare requires that certain services provided to enrollees be paid for even if the provider 
is not a contract provider, one example being emergency medical services.  Id. § 1395w-
22(d)(1)(E); 42 C.F.R. §§ 422.100(b)(1), 422.113.                         

    MAOs are insulated from state interference in the form of supplemental standards 
and are subject to near exclusive regulation by the Secretary of Department of Health and 
Human Service and CMS.  42 U.S.C. § 1395w-26(b)(3) (“The standards established under 
[Part C] shall supersede any State law or regulation (other than State licensing laws or State 
laws relating to plan solvency) with respect to [Medicare Advantage] plans which are 

offered by [Medicare Advantage] organizations under this part.”).  When disputes arise 
over  the  payment  of  a  MAO  enrollee’s  medical  bills,  Congress  has  prescribed  an 
administrative review process.  Id. § 1395w-22(g).  The review process begins with initial 
and reconsideration determinations by the MAO, 42 C.F.R. §§ 422.566, 422.578, 422.582; 
moves on to review by an independent outside entity, id. § 422.592; continues with a 

hearing  before an administrative law judge, id. § 422.600; proceeds to the Medicare 
Appeals  Council,  id.  § 422.608;  and  culminates  with  judicial  review  of  the  final 
administrative determination, id. § 422.612.  The administrative review process is open to 
providers, who may proceed as an assignee of the enrollee’s right to coverage, though the 
regulations require that the provider waive any right to payment from the enrollee.  Id. 
§§ 422.566(c)(1)(ii), 422.574(b).                                         

    The Medicare Act also makes Part C disputes subject to the provisions of, inter alia, 
42 U.S.C. § 405(h).  See 42 U.S.C. § 1395ii.  Section 405(h) provides:    
    The findings and decision of the Commissioner of Social Security after a 
    hearing shall be binding upon all individuals who were parties to such 
    hearing.  No findings of fact or decision of the Commissioner of Social 
    Security shall be reviewed by any person, tribunal, or governmental agency 
    except  as  herein  provided.    No  action  against  the  United  States,  the 
    Commissioner of Social Security, or any officer or employee thereof shall be 
    brought under section 1331 or 1346 of Title 28 to recover on any claim 
    arising under this subchapter.                                       

42 U.S.C. § 405(h).  Section 405(h) is understood to dictate that the administrative review 
process is the exclusive means of resolving disputes arising under the Medicare Act, even 
to the extent of actions brought under section 1332 of Title 28 (diversity jurisdiction).  See 
Allstar Care Inc. v. Blue Cross & Blue Shield of S.C., 184 F. Supp. 2d 1295, 1298 (S.D. 
Fla. 2002) (first citing Bodimetric Health Servs., Inc. v. Aetna Life & Casualty, 903 F.2d 
480, 489 (7th Cir. 1990); and then citing Midland Psychiatric Assocs., Inc. v. United States, 
145 F.3d 1000, 1003–04 (8th Cir. 1998)).                                  
    Based on this regulatory framework, the Ninth Circuit has held “that Congress 
intended  to  impose  under  the  Medicare  Advantage  program  the  same  administrative 
exhaustion  requirement  that  applies  to  claims  for  benefits  under  original  Medicare,” 
meaning that judicial review must be held in abeyance until a final decision emerges from 
the administrative review system.  Global Rescue Jets, LLC v. Kaiser Found. Health Plan, 
Inc., 30 F.4th 905 (9th Cir. 2022); cf. Puerto Rican Ass’n of Physical Med. & Rehab., Inc. 
v. United States, 521 F.3d 46, 48 (1st Cir. 2008) (observing that the section 405(h) bar 
requires the channeling of “virtually all legal attacks through the agency” (quoting Shalala 

v. Ill. Council on Long Term Care, Inc., 529 U.S. 1, 13 (2000))); Ill. Council, 529 U.S. at 
23 (observing that litigants “remain free, . . . after following the special review route that 
the statutes prescribe, to contest in court the lawfulness of any regulation or statute upon 
which  an  agency  determination  depends”).    In  Global  Rescue  Jets,  a  rescue  service 
provided emergency service to persons who became ill in Mexico.  30 F.4th at 908.  The 
ill patients assigned their claims for Part C benefits from Kaiser to the rescue service.  

Kaiser declined to reimburse the rescue service except to the limit of Medicare approved 
rates, resulting in litigation.  Id. at 908–10.  The Ninth Circuit affirmed the dismissal of the 
lawsuit based on lack of subject matter jurisdiction—failure to exhaust administrative 
remedies.  Id. at 919–20.  It reasoned that the dispute over payment was “inextricably 
intertwined with claims for benefits under Part C of the Medicare Act,” id. at 919, since 

the rescue service sought to recover payment from a MAO, id. at 916–19.  According to 
the Ninth Circuit, “Congress intended to impose . . . the same administrative exhaustion 
requirement that applies to claims for benefits under original Medicare.”  Id. at 914; see 
also id. (observing that the “constraints on judicial review imposed by § 405(h) apply 
equally to claims for benefits under Part C” and citing Tenet Healthsystem GB, Inc. v. Care 

Improvement Plus S. Cent. Ins. Co., 875 F.3d 584 (11th Cir. 2017)).2      

2 In Tenet, the Plaintiffs-Appellants were non-contract providers that presented the defendant MAO with 
periodic, recurring claims such that the MAO was able to adjust payments to recoup alleged, past 
overpayments, resulting in new, disputed underpayments.  The Tenet Court held that a non-contract 
provider that delivers services to a Medicare Part C enrollee is subject to the Medicare Act’s administrative 
    For the reasons set forth in Global Rescue Jets, I am persuaded that Hospital 
Quirurgica Del Sur’s effort to collect against Martin’s Point is subject to the mandatory 

administrative review process.  And based on Allstar Care and the authorities cited therein, 
see supra, Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur’s reliance on diversity rather than federal question 
jurisdiction does not change the analysis.                                
    Because Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur’s claims seek to make a MAO pay for services 
provided to a Medicare Part C enrollee, I conclude that, at least for purposes of domestic 
litigation in state or federal court, their claims arise under the Medicare Act and must, 

preliminarily, be channeled through the administrative review process.  Minimally, it is 
appropriate that this threshold jurisdictional question should be ironed out in this Circuit 
before this matter proceeds to discovery and trial (and before I consider Martin’s Point’s 
alternative arguments for dismissal for failure to state a claim).  While Hospital Quirurgica 
Del Sur contends that its situation differs from the situation in Global Rescue Jets, because 

this case does not present a claim for breach of contract, I do not see why causes of action 
based on equity and torts should be treated differently than a cause of action based on 
contracts.  All of these causes of action are similarly rooted in state common law and all 
succumb equally to the dictates of federal law.                           




apparatus because the provider’s claim for reimbursement is based on the assignment of the Medicare Part 
C enrollee’s right to coverage, and that the non-contract provider cannot plead its way around administrative 
exhaustion by presenting state common law claims arising out of the MAO’s authorization to provide 
services and promise of reimbursement.  Id. at 588–89.                    
    Because the Complaint does not include allegations that demonstrate exhaustion of 
the administrative process, the Court lacks jurisdiction to review Martin’s Point’s refusal 

to pay the entire medical bill submitted by Hospital Quirurgica Del Sur.  
                          CONCLUSION                                     
    For  the  foregoing  reasons,  Defendant’s  Motion  to  Dismiss  (ECF  No.  19)  is 
GRANTED and the case is DISMISSED for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. 
SO ORDERED.                                                              
    Dated this 23rd day of April, 2024.                                  

                             /s/ Lance E. Walker                         
                             Chief U.S. District Judge