UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
              DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                              
____________________________________                                      
                         )                                           
BRIAN HUSSEY,                 )                                           
                         )                                           
     Plaintiff,          )                                           
                         )                                           
                         )    Civil Action No. 1:21-CV-11868-AK      
v.                            )                                           
                         )                                           
CITY OF CAMBRIDGE and         )                                           
BRANVILLE BARD,  in his capacity as   )                                   
Commissioner of the Cambridge Police   )                                  
Department                    )                                           
                         )                                           
     Defendants.         )                                           
                                                                   ) 

               MEMORANDUM AND ORDER                                  
       ON CROSS-MOTIONS FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT                         

ANGEL KELLEY, D.J.                                                        
On February 25, 2021, nine months after George Floyd’s murder by a police officer, 
while the nation was still in a heated debate over racism and police brutality, Cambridge Police 
Officer Brian Hussey (“Hussey”) reposted an article about a police reform bill called “the 
George Floyd Act” on his personal Facebook page.  His comment accompanying the post said: 
“This is what its come to ‘honoring’ a career criminal, a thief and druggie . . . the future of this 
country is bleak at best.”  [Dkt. 1 (“Compl.”) at ¶ 11].  Despite the post being deleted shortly 
thereafter, it was brought to the attention of then Police Commissioner Branville Bard (“Bard”) 
by officers of the local National Association of Advancement of Colored People (“NAACP”) 
chapter and a local community activist.  Hussey was then placed on leave.  
After being disciplined, Plaintiff Hussey brought this action pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 
§ 1983, against the City of Cambridge and Bard (together “the Defendants”), alleging that the 
Defendants retaliated against him in violation of his First Amendment right to freedom of 
speech.  [Compl.].  The Defendants then filed a Motion to Dismiss pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 
12(b)(6).  [Dkt. 9].  This Court denied the Defendants’ Motion to Dismiss, except as to the claim 
brought against Commissioner Bard in his individual capacity.  [Dkt. 25].  While the Court found 

that Hussey’s post could have had a detrimental impact on the perception of the Cambridge 
Police Department internally and in the community, the Court could not dismiss the case on the 
question of whether the department’s interest outweighed Hussey’s interests without a more 
developed factual record.  [Id. at 13].  The Court therefore allowed Hussey’s claims to proceed 
against the City of Cambridge and Commissioner Bard in his official capacity.1  [Id.].   
                                               0F                    
On June 8, 2023, the City of Cambridge filed their Motion for Summary Judgment.  [Dkt. 
37].  The same day, Plaintiff filed his Motion for Partial Summary Judgment on the question of 
the Defendants’ liability for violating his First Amendment right to free speech.  [Dkt. 41].  The 
Court heard oral argument on January 29, 2024 and took the matter under advisement.  [Dkt. 60].  
The Court, having considered both of these motions, the parties’ oppositions, and reply briefs, 
finds that Plaintiff has failed to create a material dispute of fact to survive Defendants’ Motion 
for Summary Judgment.  The Court also finds that because it has determined that Hussey’s 
speech was not protected and because there is no factual dispute for a jury to resolve, the 
Defendants’ Motion for Summary Judgment [Dkt. 37] is GRANTED, Plaintiff’s Partial Motion 
for Summary Judgment [Dkt. 41] is DENIED, and his case is accordingly DISMISSED.  




1 In August 2022, after this lawsuit had already commenced, Hussey was promoted to the rank of Sergeant.  [Dkt. 54 
at II at ¶ 5]. The Court therefore denied as moot Plaintiff’s request to amend his complaint to add a retaliation claim 
related to his denial of a promotion, after counsel reported his intentions to withdraw the motion.  [Dkts. 14, 24].   
I.   BACKGROUND                                                           
In evaluating the cross-motions for summary judgment, the Court relies on the parties’ 
statements of material facts, responses thereto, and any attached exhibits the parties have 
submitted.  [See Dkts. 39, 43, 52, 54, 58-1].  The Court accepts as true each material fact to the 

extent it has not been disputed by the opposing party and considers contested each material fact 
that either party has disputed.  Unless otherwise noted, the facts below are undisputed. 
Giving due respect to George Floyd, the Court notes he was born in North Carolina in 
1973 and moved to Houston shortly thereafter.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶ 53].  He grew up in the Third 
Ward—one of Houston’s most economically disadvantaged neighborhoods.  [Dkt. 44-10 at 2-3].  
Floyd was a star athlete, briefly playing collegiate basketball at Texas A&M University-
Kingsville, but returned to his old neighborhood in Houston without completing his degree.  [Id. 
at 3].  Thereafter, Floyd experienced a string of arrests and periods of incarceration.  Between 
1997 and 2005, he served eight jail terms on charges that included drug possession, theft, and 
trespass.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶ 54].  In 2007, he was charged with aggravated robbery with a deadly 

weapon and was sentenced to five years in prison.  [Id. at ¶ 55].  He was released on parole in 
2013.  [Id.].  Floyd thereafter turned his life around and appeared to live a law-abiding life.  [Dkt. 
44-10 at 4].  In 2014, he had a daughter.  [Dkt. 44-12 at 9].  He became more involved in his 
church’s program, which took men from Houston’s Third Ward neighborhood to Minnesota to 
provide them with drug rehabilitation and job placement services.  [Dkt. 44-10 at 4].   
Floyd soon made the permanent move to Minneapolis, Minnesota.  [Dkt. 44-11 at 8].  He 
found work first as a security guard for the Salvation Army and later as a bouncer for a 
nightclub.  [Id.].  When the pandemic forced the nightclub to close, Floyd was out of work.  [Id. 
at 9].  On Memorial Day 2020, Floyd was at a convenience store when one of the store 
employees thought he had paid for cigarettes with a counterfeit $20 bill and called the police.  
[Id.].  The events that followed are known to all due to the widely circulated cellphone video 
capturing Minneapolis Police Officer Derek Chauvin kneeling on Floyd’s neck for 8 minutes and 
46 seconds, Floyd’s pleas that he could not breathe, and his body eventually going limp.  [Dkt. 

44-12 at 3].  Floyd’s last words “I can’t breathe” echoed those of Eric Garner and the Black 
Lives Matter movement’s call to action.  [Dkt. 44-9 at 4].  His killing ignited a national 
reckoning on issues of racism, police brutality, and accountability for police misconduct, in 
addition to local, national and global protests.  [Id.].  Officer Chauvin was subsequently 
convicted of second-degree murder; the three other officers who participated in the arrest were 
likewise convicted on related charges.2                                   
                    1F                                               
The National Climate                                                      
The impact of Floyd’s death was felt here in Massachusetts where, as in the rest of the 
country, protesters filled the streets by the thousands demanding an end to such violence. The 
City of Cambridge saw over 3,500 people in the streets in one such protest.3  In the neighboring 
                                             2F                      
City of Boston, the alleged wanton use of pepper spray and riot batons against protesters led to a 



2 Kiara Alfonseca, Derek Chauvin sentenced to 21 years on federal charges for violating George Floyd’s civil rights, 
ABC news (July 7, 2022), https://abcnews.go.com/US/derek-chauvin-sentenced-federal-charges-violating-george-
floyds/story?id=86366456. The Court takes judicial notice of the updated details of the criminal trial following 
Floyd’s murder under Fed. R. Evid. 201(b).                                

3 Marc Levy, Protest draws thousands to hear the challenges of reforming police, education, other institutions, 
Cambridge Day (June 7, 2020), https://www.cambridgeday.com/2020/06/07/protest-draws-thousands-to-hear-the-
challenges-of-reforming-police-education-other-institutions/. The Court takes here and elsewhere judicial notice 
under Fed. R. Evid. 201(b) of articles describing the unrest that occurred in the aftermath of George Floyd’s killing 
within Massachusetts between May 2020 and March 2021. See United States v. Griffin, 525 F.2d 710 (1st Cir. 1975) 
(taking judicial notice of the fact that forced busing in Boston “received substantial publicity and aroused 
widespread resentment.”).                                                 
lawsuit accusing the Boston Police Department of using excessive force.4  Protests were ongoing 
                                           3F                        
when Hussey made his Facebook post, and many continued for months thereafter.5  
                                                 4F                  
Officer Brian Hussey                                                      
Plaintiff Brian Hussey began working as a Cambridge police officer in 1998 and spent 10 
years in the Special Investigations Unit (SIU) where he conducted roughly “a couple hundred” 
drug crime investigations.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶ 4].  For the first decade of his career, he worked as a 
patrol officer in lower Cambridge.  [Dkt. 39 at ¶ 12].  In June 2009, he applied to and joined the 
SIU where he investigated drug and vice crimes.  [Id. at ¶ 14].  Hussey worked in the SIU for ten 
years, taking part in hundreds of drug crime investigations, where he worked with confidential 
informants and spoke to drug users throughout the City of Cambridge.  [Id. at ¶¶ 15-16].  To 
secure the cooperation of these informants, Plaintiff had to reassure them that the police were 
“going to protect them” and that “the police would do whatever [they] could to help them.”  [Id. 
at ¶ 17].  Much of Hussey’s time in the SIU was spent convincing drug users to trust him.  [Id. at 
¶ 18].                                                                    
The Facebook Post                                                         
On February 25, 2021, Hussey shared on his Facebook page a WHDH news article titled, 
“House Democrats reintroduce police reform bill in honor of George Floyd.”  [Dkt. 43 at ¶ 5].  In 
a comment he shared alongside the article, Hussey wrote, “This is what its [sic] come to 
‘honoring’ a career criminal, a thief and druggie . . . the future of this country is bleak at best.”  



4 Huffman v. City of Bos., No. 21-CV-10986-ADB, 2022 WL 2308937 (D. Mass. June 27, 2022). 

5 Associated Press, Protesters at Boston Rallies Call for Justice for George Floyd, Action on Police Killing Cases 
(Mar. 6, 2021), https://www.nbcboston.com/news/local/rally-in-boston-to-call-for-action-on-police-killing-
cases/2321508/.                                                           
[Id. at ¶ 7].  The bill in question, which never passed,6 proposed reforms to increase 
                              5F                                     
accountability for police misconduct, enhance transparency and data collection, and to eliminate 
discriminatory policing practices.  [Dkt. 44-3 at 4].  Hussey reports that the day he made that 
Facebook post was a training day, and since he had previously completed his training online, he 
spent the day taking his children to the New England Aquarium instead.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶ 12].  He 
made the post at 8:08 AM using his personal phone while at home.  [Id. at ¶¶ 14, 18; Dkt. 44-3 at 
3].  Around an hour after his post, two comments were posted, neither of which Hussey replied 
to.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶¶ 15-16].  Hussey claims that he deleted the post a couple of hours after he 
posted it.  [Id. at ¶ 17].                                                
The parties dispute whether the word “druggie” is inherently derogatory, but at minimum 
it refers to someone who is a drug addict, and the parties agree that the term itself does not have 
any racial connotation.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶¶ 50-51].  In Hussey’s post, he did not identify himself as a 
Cambridge police officer or reference his position in the police department.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶ 8].  
Most of the people on his Facebook though would have been aware that he was a police officer.  

He estimates that around 91 of his Facebook friends as of 2023 were either retired or active 
members of the Cambridge Police Department, while only 30 may have been unaware of his 
involvement with the Cambridge Police Department.  [Dkt. 39 at ¶ 10].  In April 2021, at the 
time he made his post, Hussey had around 674 friends on his Facebook, of which a significant 
number were Cambridge police officers.  [Id. at ¶ 10].7  His Facebook account is restricted; 
                               6F                                    



6 George Floyd Justice in Policing Act of 2020, H.R. 7120, 116th Cong. (2020).   

7 Plaintiff states that as of 2023, he has 535 Facebook friends. [Dkt. 54 at ¶ 9].  
therefore, only those who have accepted his “friend requests” are able to see his posts.  [Id. at ¶ 
9].  Hussey does not accept friend requests from people he does not know.  [Id.].   
The Complaints                                                            
Approximately six days later, on or around March 3, 2021, Commissioner Branville Bard 

became aware of Hussey’s Facebook post after Richard Harding, who was then either the 
President or Vice-President of the Cambridge NAACP, contacted him.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶ 19; Dkt. 44-
5 (“Bard Tr.”) at 25:11-15].  According to Bard, the post was less than an hour old when a 
screenshot was shared with the NAACP, who then shared it with Bard.  [Bard Tr. at 31:2-15]. 
Bard was the police commissioner for the City of Cambridge from mid-2017 to August 
2021.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶ 34].  Bard and Cambridge City Manager Louis Depasquale met with 
Harding, community activist Mo Barbosa, and former Mayor Ken Reeves (who was then an 
Officer with the Cambridge NAACP) to discuss Hussey’s Facebook post via videoconference.  
[Id. at ¶ 20; Bard Tr. at 26:17-24].  The group wanted to speak urgently.  [Bard Tr. at 49:1-14] 
Bard described the three community leaders as “alarmed and concerned about the post.”  [Id.].  

The identity of the person who initially brought the post to the NAACP’s attention was not 
disclosed to Bard in order to protect that person’s anonymity.  [Bard Tr. at 31:7-12].  Former 
Mayor Reeves expressed his concern that Hussey’s post called into question the ability of the 
Cambridge Police Department to serve in a biased-free manner and ran afoul of what the 
Department should embody.  [Dkt. 52 at ¶ 68].  At that meeting, Bard obtained a copy of the 
Facebook post and shared it with the Professional Standards Unit (PSU) for investigation.  [Id. at 
¶ 69].                                                                    
Bard’s Explanation                                                        
Bard considered the post “damaging to the reputation of the Cambridge Police 

Department” because it was “insensitive to individuals who’ve suffered from substance use 
issues.”  [Dkt. 43 at ¶ 22].  He considered the use of the word “druggie” derogatory and 
“dehumanizing” to people with substance abuse issues.  [Id. at ¶ 26].  He did not think that race 
played a role in Hussey’s post.  [Id. at ¶ 27].  Still, Bard felt that the post disparaged George 
Floyd and would cause irreparable harm to the Cambridge Police Department’s reputation.  [Dkt. 
39 at ¶ 24].  The Cambridge Police Department, as Bard describes it, disciplined Hussey for his 
Facebook post because:                                                    
[I]t had negative connotations and it tore at the fabric of trust that we spent a long 
time building in the community. Folks viewed the Cambridge Police Department 
as one who favors prevention, intervention, and diversion over more serious or 
more punitive methods traditionally associated with the criminal justice 
system . . . we pride ourselves on the fact that we believe that individuals are 
better served through a social justice approach than through your traditional 
criminal justice approaches. And when you have that approach, that often means 
that you’re often working hand in hand with individuals who have . . . fallen in 
life and are working towards better outcomes. Some of those individuals have 
substance use issues.                                                
[Id. at ¶ 25].  Bard considered the post especially harmful “in the context of the national 
climate.”  [Id. at ¶ 26].  He added that “trust takes a lifetime to build and just a moment to tear 
down” and that “any individual associated with the Cambridge Police Department could in a 
moment tear down . . . trust we’ve spent a long time building with community.”  [Id.].  Bard 
asserts that the Cambridge Police Department needs to have the public’s trust because the only 
way the police department can function and do its job is “to be seen as trustworthy and legitimate 
and bias free.”  [Id. at ¶ 27].  Bard could not recall whether he received any additional calls or 
complaints about the Facebook post, or if he received any additional complaints from Hussey’s 
fellow employees at the Cambridge Police Department.  [Bard Tr. at 31:2-5; 43:1-12].  
The Investigation                                                         
 During the police department’s investigation of the post, the Professional Standards Unit 

(“PSU”) investigators only interviewed Brian Hussey.  [Dkt. 52 at ¶¶ 31, 45].  Hussey made the 
following statement where he attempted to put his words into context:     
I have had many discussions with both coworkers and people in my personal life 
regarding the George Floyd incident and the subsequent police reform that has 
come about as a result of that incident. My thoughts and views are consistent and 
have never wavered.[] What happened to George Floyd on May 25, 2020 never 
should have happened . . . he did not deserve to die.  Derek Chauvin is a disgrace 
to the badge and probably never should have worn one in the first place. The same 
goes for the officers who stood by and did nothing. I am 100% in favor of police 
reform. I will be the first person to say there absolutely are rogue, questionable 
and dishonest police officers who are an embarrassment and a disgrace to the 
profession. That being said, the one thing I disagree with is naming a police 
reform bill in “honor” of George Floyd. I understand that this incident, the 
proverbial straw that broke the camel’s back, led to the calls for police reform, 
hence the naming of the bill in his “honor.” While George Floyd did not deserve 
to have his life taken away that day, he was still a violent criminal. I feel that 
attaching the name of a violent career criminal, in “honor,” to a reform bill aimed 
at the betterment of policing is a disservice to the spirit of the bill. To take it a 
step further, I would feel this way if any career criminal of any race were to be 
“honored” in a such a manner. It wouldn’t matter to me if the person were Black, 
White, Hispanic, Asian, or any other race – my feelings would still be the same. A 
police reform bill should not be named after a violent career criminal. There are 
many other people of honor who could have been memorialized in the naming of 
this bill.                                                           

I am the author of my words and I am fully aware of their meaning and intent. My 
comment in no way endorses the manner in which the Minneapolis Police 
Officers dealt with George Floyd. Regardless of his background, he deserved to 
be treated with respect and with no more force than was necessary to gain 
compliance with lawful orders.                                       

Rather, my words reflect my opinion that legislators should have considered a 
more appropriate name for their bill. Any undertaking to interpret or portray them 
any differently than my intended meaning is misguided . . . As an American 
citizen, I should be able to voice an opinion and have constructive discussions on 
a wide variety of topics, covering many aspects of life.             

[Id. at ¶ 32].  When asked about the above statement, in particular Hussey’s condemnation of 
Derek Chauvin’s actions, Bard said “I wish that was the content of his Facebook post because 
then we wouldn't be sitting here today.”  [Bard Tr. at 39:2-8].  At the same time, Hussey reported 
that he received text messages of support from around a dozen fellow Cambridge police officers.  
[Dkt. 52 at ¶ 33; Dkt. 44-7].                                             
PSU conducted an investigation into the Facebook post and determined that it violated 
Cambridge Police Department Rules and Regulations Chapter 2, Section III, Paragraph B, which 
prohibits “discourtesy, rudeness, or insolence, to any member of the public” and Cambridge 
Police Department Policies and Procedures Policy 230, Section V, Paragraph A, Part 1, which 
requires officers to “be courteous and act professionally at all times.”  [Dkt. 52 at ¶ 70].  After 
two months of being placed on administrative leave, on April 30, 2021, Commissioner Bard 
informed Hussey that he was suspending him without pay for four days based on his Facebook 
post and the violation of Cambridge Police Department Rules and Regulations that it entailed.  
[Dkt. 54-1].  The letter from Bard announcing the suspension also stated that the suspension was 
“an appropriate sanction for what I view as a violation of Department policy, but more 
importantly, to caution you against similar conduct.”  [Id.].             
Other Social Media Posts and Statements Regarding Substance Abuse         

No policy prohibits Cambridge Police officers from posting on social media, although 
they are prohibited from posting on social media about non-work-related matters during work 
times.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶ 35].  In a number of instances, the Cambridge Police Department is alleged 
to have disciplined officers differently than it did Hussey for provocative or offensive postings.  
For example, Jack Albert, a Deputy Superintendent with the Cambridge Police Department, 
posted a comment on the department’s official Twitter page that Congressmen Joe Kennedy III 
was “another liberal [****]ing jerk.”  [Id. at ¶ 36-37].  Albert received a five-day suspension for 
his post, although Bard did not recall whether he was placed on administrative leave or whether 
he served his suspension.  [Id. at ¶ 39].  Albert’s post about Congressmen Kennedy was reported 

in the news.  [Bard Tr. 14:17-24].                                        
In July 2020, in response to a proposed bill redirecting police department funds toward 
social services, the Cambridge Police Patrol Officers’ Association tweeted, “If you think seven 
civilians killed in seven days in Boston is bad, just wait for the purge that will come.”  [Dkt. 43 
at ¶ 40].  The Cambridge Police Department did not investigate who wrote or posted the tweet.  
[Id. at ¶ 41].  Bard could not recall either whether the Cambridge Police Department disciplined 
another police officer who made a “deeply disturbing” social media post in praise of political 
violence while out on extended leave.  [Id. at ¶ 43].                     
 In April 2022, the Cambridge Police Department received a complaint from a 
community member that Hussey had said he “was tired of crackheads thinking they can get away 

with everything.”  [Id. at ¶ 46].  He was not placed on administrative leave following that 
complaint and was not the subject of any discipline as a result of the complaint.  [Id. at ¶ 47].  
Hussey asserts that in July of 2022, while he and now Commissioner Elow were on duty 
planning the arrests of drug users in Central Square via the use of informants, Elow said 
something along the lines of, “well they are just crackheads.”  [Id. at ¶ 48].  Elow admitted using 
the word “crackheads” to describe drug users in Central Square and conceded to Hussey that it 
was an inappropriate word to use.  [Dkt. 44-6 (“Elow Tr.”) 10:20-13:11].  Hussey recalled, and 
Elow disputes, that when Hussey brought up the fact that he was being investigated for using the 
word “crackheads” that Elow said “you just can’t call them that to their face.”  [Dkt. 43 at ¶ 49; 
Elow Tr. 11:17-19].                                                       
II.  LEGAL STANDARD                                                       
The purpose of summary judgment is to “pierce the pleadings and to assess the proof in 

order to see whether there is a genuine need for trial.”  Mesnick v. Gen. Elec. Co., 950 F.2d 816, 
822 (1st Cir. 1991) (citing Garside v. Osco Drug, Inc., 895 F.2d 46, 50 (1st Cir. 1990)).  
Summary judgment may be granted when the record, viewed in the light most favorable to the 
non-moving party, presents no “genuine issue of material fact,” and the moving party is entitled 
to judgment as a matter of law.  Paul v. Murphy, 948 F.3d 42, 49 (1st Cir. 2020) (citation 
omitted).  The Court must consider (1) whether a factual dispute exists; (2) whether the factual 
dispute is “genuine,” such that a “reasonable fact-finder could return a verdict for the nonmoving 
party on the basis of the evidence;” and (3) whether a fact genuinely in dispute is material, such 
that it “might affect the outcome of the suit under the applicable substantive law.”  Scott v. 
Sulzer Carbomedics, Inc., 141 F. Supp. 2d 154, 170 (D. Mass. 2001); see also Napier v. F/V 

DEESIE, Inc., 454 F.3d 61, 66 (1st Cir. 2006).  Courts must evaluate “the record and [draw] all 
reasonable inferences therefrom in the light most favorable to the non-moving parties.”  Est. of 
Hevia v. Portrio Corp., 602 F.3d 34, 40 (1st Cir. 2010) (citing Houlton Citizens’ Coal. v. Town 
of Houlton, 175 F.3d 178, 183-84 (1st Cir. 1999)).  A non-moving party may “defeat a summary 
judgment motion by demonstrating, through submissions of evidentiary quality, that a 
trialworthy issue persists.”  Paul, 948 F.3d at 49 (citation omitted).  When evaluating cross-
motions for summary judgment, the court must “view each motion, separately, through this 
prism,” and “may enter summary judgment only if the record, read in this manner, reveals that 
there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment 
as a matter of law.”  Hevia, 602 F.3d at 40 (internal citations omitted). 
III.  DISCUSSION                                                          
The constitutional right to free speech is protected by the First Amendment’s guiding 

principle that debate on public issues should be “uninhibited, robust, and wide-open.”  N.Y. 
Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254, 270 (1964).  The public interest in that “free and 
unhindered debate on matters of public importance” is “the core value of the Free Speech Clause 
of the First Amendment.”  Pickering v. Bd. of Educ., 391 U.S. 563, 573 (1968).  There is 
“universal agreement that a major purpose of the First Amendment was to protect the free 
discussion of governmental affairs.”  Mangual v. Rotger-Sabat, 317 F.3d 45, 64-65 (1st Cir. 
2003) (quoting Mills v. Alabama, 384 U.S. 214, 218 (1966)).  This principle also protects, albeit 
to a more limited degree, the speech of public employees.  Curran v. Cousins, 509 F.3d 36, 44 
(1st Cir. 2007) (“Public employees do not lose their First Amendment rights to speak on matters 
of public concern simply because they are public employees . . . [s]till, those rights are not 

absolute.”).  “In general, government officials may not subject an individual to retaliatory 
actions . . . for speaking out.”  Gilbert v. City of Chicopee, 915 F.3d 74, 81 (1st Cir. 2019) 
(internal citations and quotations omitted).  However, when a citizen enters a public role, they 
must accept certain limitations on their freedoms.  Garcetti v. Ceballos, 547 U.S. 410, 418 (2006) 
(“Government employers, like private employers, need a significant degree of control over their 
employees’ words and actions; without it, there would be little chance for the efficient provision 
of public services.”); Decotiis v. Whittemore, 635 F.3d 22, 29 (1st Cir. 2011) (“Government 
employees undoubtedly walk a tight rope when it comes to speaking out on issues that touch 
upon their fields of work and expertise.”).  A government employee speaking as a citizen on a 
matter of public concern can only be subject to “those speech restrictions that are necessary for 
their employers to operate efficiently and effectively.”  Garcetti, 547 U.S at 419.  
Plaintiff brings his First Amendment claim pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983 which  
provides that “[e]very person” acting “under color of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, 

or usage of any State or Territory or the District of Columbia” who subjects or causes to subject 
someone “to the deprivation of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by the Constitution 
and laws” shall be liable to the injured party.  42 U.S.C. § 1983.  An individual asserting a 
Section 1983 claim must show that the challenged conduct is “attributable to a person acting 
under color of state law” and that the conduct was a “denial of rights secured by the Constitution 
or by federal law.”  Soto v. Flores, 103 F.3d 1056, 1061 (1st Cir. 1997). 
The First Circuit requires a three-step inquiry to determine whether an adverse 
employment action violated a public employees’ First Amendment right to free speech.  Bruce v. 
Worcester Reg’l Transit Auth., 34 F.4th 129, 135 (1st Cir. 2022).  This inquiry is modeled after 
the balancing test initially articulated in Pickering.  First, the Court must evaluate whether the 

employee “spoke as a citizen on a matter of public concern.”  Gilbert, 915 F.3d at 82 (quoting 
Curran, 509 F.3d at 45).  If the Court finds that the speech in question was made pursuant to the 
speaker’s official duties, then there is no First Amendment claim as “[r]estricting speech that 
owes its existence to a public employee's professional responsibilities does not infringe any 
liberties.”  Id. (quoting Garcetti, 547 U.S. at 421-22).  Second, if the employee did speak as a 
citizen on a matter of public concern, the Court must look to whether the government entity 
involved had an adequate justification, based on the impact to its own operations, for the action it 
took towards that employee.  Bruce, 34 F.4th at 135 (quoting Curran, 509 F.3d at 45).  Third, the 
Court looks to whether the protected speech was a substantial or motivating factor in the adverse 
employment action.  Id.                                                   
There is no dispute as to the first and third prong.  Hussey v. City of Cambridge, No. 21-
CV-11868-AK, 2022 WL 6820717, at *2 (D. Mass. Oct. 11, 2022); [Dkt. 53 at 2 n.2].  

Therefore, the Defendants’ liability turns on balancing the interest of Hussey, as a citizen 
speaking on a matter of public concern, with the interests of the Defendants in restricting that 
speech to aid “the effective and efficient fulfillment of its responsibilities to the public.”  
Connick v. Myers, 461 U.S. 138, 150 (1983).  The Court must “consider (1) ‘the time, place, and 
manner of the employee's speech,’ and (2) ‘the employer's motivation in making the adverse 
employment decision.”  Bruce, 34 F.4th at 138 (quoting Decotiis, 635 F.3d at 35).  If these 
factors demonstrate that the employee only faced those speech restrictions that were “necessary 
for his employer to operate efficiently and effectively” then “the defendants’ restrictions on 
speech were adequately justified.”  Id.  How cautious an employee must be with the words they 
use “will vary with the extent of authority and public accountability the employee’s role entails.”  

Rankin v. McPherson, 483 U.S. 378, 390 (1987).                            
Since only the second prong is in dispute, and because the balancing of interests is a 
question of law the Court must decide, there is not a triable question of fact left for a jury.  See 
id. at 386 n.9 (describing test for whether speech is of public concern wherein “the ultimate 
issue—whether the speech is protected—is a question of law”) (quoting Connick, 461 U.S. at 
148 n.7); Davignon v. Hodgson, 524 F.3d 91, 100 (1st Cir. 2008) (describing Pickering 
balancing test’s assessment of what the First Amendment protects as subject to de novo review 
whereas question of causation in retaliation claim presents a question of fact). But see Moser v. 
Las Vegas Metro. Police Dep’t, 984 F.3d 900, 905 (9th Cir. 2021) (“While the Pickering 
balancing test presents a question of law for the court to decide, it may still implicate factual 
disputes that preclude the court from resolving the test at the summary judgment stage.”); 
Weaver v. Chavez, 458 F.3d 1096, 1101 (10th Cir. 2006) (describing how “it is well-settled that 
the balancing assessment must be performed by the court, not the jury” although noting that 

circuits are split as to when Pickering test turns on disputed questions of fact).  Although there 
may be some factual disputes that remain outstanding, such as disagreements about how to 
interpret the words used and the degree to which the Facebook post was shared, the Court is not 
aware of any whose resolution is necessary to resolve the balance of interests.  Even if the Court 
resolved any such disputes in Plaintiff’s favor, it would still find that Defendants’ interest 
outweighed Plaintiff’s here.                                              
A.  Interest in Hussey’s Speech                                      
At the motion to dismiss stage, this Court stated that “the value of Hussey’s speech, 
including his use of derogatory, pejorative labels, was not particularly high, though it was also 
not without any value.”  Hussey, 2022 WL 6820717, at *5; [Dkt. 25 at 10].  While the Court’s 

determination at this stage is not dependent on its earlier assessment, the development of the 
factual record has not altered that conclusion.  Hussey’s post was undoubtedly about a matter of 
public concern: the naming of an official act of Congress and his objections to the name chosen 
for it.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶¶ 5-7].  The proposed act sought to address police reform and racial 
inequality—issues of tremendous importance to the public.  [Dkt. 44-3 at 4].  Moreover, given 
the galvanizing role George Floyd’s murder played in the widespread protests in 2020 and 
thereafter, there is value in the public’s continued discussions of his life and legacy.  [See Dkt. 
44-9 at 4].                                                               
 The fact that Hussey is employed as a police officer is relevant as well, given that his 
comments were about the nature of a police reform bill.  Discouraging Hussey and other officers 

from participating as citizens in discussions about public safety, police brutality, and racial 
profiling would deprive the public of a valuable viewpoint.  Garcetti, 547 U.S. at 419 
(acknowledging “the importance of promoting the public’s interest in receiving the well-
informed views of government employees engaging in civic discussion” given the “the necessity 
for informed, vibrant dialogue in a democratic society” and “the widespread costs may arise 
when dialogue is repressed”); see also Pickering, 391 U.S. at 573 (rejecting attempt by school 
administrators to limit teachers’ ability to participate in public debate partly because it was 
essential that teachers be able to speak freely given that they were more likely than members of 
the general public to have informed opinions on school operations and funding).   
Hussey’s post was made on his personal Facebook account from his personal phone. 

[Dkt. 43 at ¶¶ 14, 18].  However, the reach of his statement was amplified by it being on a social 
media platform.  Writing on Facebook is accurately compared to “writing a letter to a local 
newspaper” and “suggests an intent to ‘communicate to the public or to advance a political or 
social point of view beyond the employment context.’”  Liverman v. City of Petersburg, 844 
F.3d 400, 410 (4th Cir. 2016) (quoting Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri, 564 U.S. 379, 398 
(2011)).  Hussey argues that the post could not have had a disruptive impact since the post was 
only up for a couple of hours on his private Facebook profile.  [Dkt. 42 at 13].  This argument is 
not persuasive.  The post was screenshotted, its content was shared beyond Hussey’s network, 
and it had begun to attract attention.  An individual like Hussey takes a “gamble . . .  in posting 
content on the internet” as there is a “lack of control one has over its further dissemination.”  
Duke v. Hamil, 997 F. Supp. 2d 1291, 1300, 1302 (N.D. Ga. 2014) (dismissing a veteran police 
officer’s claim that his government employer violated the First Amendment by demoting him 
after he posted an image of the Confederate flag accompanied by the phrase, “It’s time for the 

second revolution,” on his private Facebook page).  Hussey also shared his post with all his 
Facebook friends, who number in the hundreds, and most of whom were aware he was employed 
as an Officer in the Cambridge Police Department.  [Dkt. 39 at ¶ 10].  Social media use in this 
context can be a double-edged sword.  On one hand, social media can make any citizen “a town 
crier with a voice that resonates farther than it could from any soapbox,” increasing the 
message’s reach and Hussey’s First Amendment interest along with it.  Packingham v. North 
Carolina, 582 U.S. 98, 107 (2017) (quoting Reno v. Am. Civ. Liberties Union, 521 U.S. 844, 870 
(1997).  At the same time, such increased exposure amplifies the potential consequences to 
employers.                                                                
The value of Hussey’s speech is lessened by the inflammatory and insulting manner in 

which his post was written. “Speech done in a vulgar, insulting, and defiant manner is entitled to 
less weight in the Pickering balance.”  Curran, 509 F.3d at 49 (citing Jordan v. Carter, 428 F.3d 
67, 74 (1st Cir. 2005); see also Hernandez v. City of Phx., 43 F.4th 966, 979 (9th Cir. 2022) 
(police officer’s social media posts that insulted racial and religious minorities occupied “a much 
lower rung on the First Amendment hierarchy” and “touched on matters of public concern in 
only the most limited sense” (citations omitted)).  The post called George Floyd “a career 
criminal, a thief and druggie.”  [Dkt. 43 at ¶ 7].  The term “druggie” may be subject to differing 
interpretations; however, in both its common understanding and in the manner it was used in the 
Facebook post, the term is employed as a pejorative to disparage its subject as a person 
struggling with drug addiction.  [Id. at ¶ 50].  Even if the term itself is not inherently derogatory, 
here it was used in a derogatory fashion.  The terms “thief” and “a career criminal” are similarly 
insulting, even though they reflect the fact that, for a ten-year period in Floyd’s life from 1997 
until 2007, he participated in criminal activity that included offenses related to theft and 

robbery.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶¶ 54-55].  More relevant than the particular terms used was the fact that the 
thrust of the message disparaged George Floyd as being unworthy of being honored in that 
manner because of his past criminal conduct and substance abuse issues.  It dismissed the 
reasons why George Floyd’s life and tragic death inspired the legislation.    
However, the value of Hussey’s post is not as diminished as it would have been had 
Hussey used lewd, vulgar, or obscene terms.  See Curran, 509 F.3d at 49; see also Hernandez, 43 

F.4th at 979; Bennett v. Metro. Gov't of Nashville & Davidson Cnty., Tenn., 977 F.3d 530, 538-
39 (6th Cir. 2020) (use of n-word in social media post did not receive “highest rung” of 
protection and consequently required a lower showing of disruption to justify employer’s adverse 
action).  The term “druggie” may be a pejorative and offensive term, but it is neither profane nor 
obscene.  Notably, both Commissioner Bard and Elow agreed that the term does not have any 
racial connotation.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶ 51].  The other words used by Hussey are commonplace terms.   
Hussey’s speech could be categorized as insensitive, disparaging, or dehumanizing (as 
Bard described it) [id. at ¶ 26], particularly by those concerned with helping individuals with 
substance use challenges or those who sought to honor Floyd as an emblematic Black victim of 
police brutality.  However, even if the Court agreed with that assessment, it would not diminish 

Hussey’s interest in being able to share his opinion on the topic.  Offensive speech can still be 
protected speech if an employer retaliates against the employee because of their objections to the 
content of that speech, rather than their concern for the speech’s impact on public functions.  See 
Hayes v. Mass. Bay Transp. Auth., 498 F. Supp. 3d 224, 234 (D. Mass. 2020) (“[V]igilance is 
necessary to ensure that public employers do not use authority over employees to silence 
discourse, not because it hampers public functions but simply because superiors disagree with 
the content of employees’ speech.”) (quoting Rankin, 483 U.S. at 384).    

However, the Court does not find in Hussey’s favor because, even if it viewed his post in 
the light most favorable to him and resolved any factual disputes about its content or context in 
his favor, his interest would be outweighed by the strong interest the Cambridge Police 
Department had here in restricting his speech.  The Court explains below. 
B.  Cambridge Police Department’s Interest in Restricting Hussey’s Speech 

While evaluating the government’s interest, the Court considers “whether the statement 
impairs discipline by superiors or harmony among co-workers, has a detrimental impact on close 
working relationships for which personal loyalty and confidence are necessary, or impedes the 
performance of the speaker’s duties or interferes with the regular operation of the enterprise.”  
Rankin, 483 U.S. at 388 (citing Pickering, 391 U.S. at 570-573).  Plaintiff asserts there is no 
indication Hussey’s speech would disrupt the functioning of the police department because of the 
lack of objections within the Cambridge Police Department, the Defendants’ failure to address 
similarly offensive speech, and the lack of controversy in the public sphere that followed the 
post.  [Dkt. 42 at 11-15].  The Defendants argue instead that Hussey’s comments threatened the 
Cambridge Police Department’s functions because his public disparagement of Floyd, who 
struggled with substance abuse and had a criminal history, could have jeopardized public trust in 
the Department.  [Dkt. 38 at 5-9].  Defendants’ concerns are underscored by a national climate 
which placed a magnifying glass on the issue of bias within every police department.  
The focus of the Court’s inquiry here is whether the Cambridge Police Department and 
Commissioner Bard’s “predictions of disruption” to the Department flowing from Hussey’s post 

were “reasonable,” rather than whether Hussey’s comments caused “an actual adverse effect.”  
Curran, 509 F.3d at 49.  The nature of the inquiry reflects the fact that government employers 
must have “wide latitude in managing their offices, without intrusive oversight by the judiciary 
in the name of the First Amendment.”  Connick, 461 U.S. at 146.  The Court must give 
“substantial weight to government employers’ reasonable predictions of disruption” and gives 
“greater deference to government predictions of harm used to justify restriction of employee 
speech than to predictions of harm used to justify restrictions on the speech of the public at 
large.”  Waters v. Churchill, 511 U.S. 661, 673 (1994).  Still, the Defendants’ judgment must be 
based on some evidence and cannot rely on speculation alone to justify its actions.  Moser, 984 
F.3d at 909 (“[A]n employer must provide some evidence for the court to evaluate whether the 

government’s claims of disruption appear reasonable” such as “evidence that the community it 
serves discovered the speech or would inevitably discover it.”); Fenico v. City of Phila., 70 F.4th 
151, 166 (3d Cir. 2023) (“[A]n employer must still establish likely disruption through record 
support, and courts have long required more than ‘unadorned speculation as to the impact of 
speech.’”) (quoting Hall v. Ford, 856 F.2d 255, 261 (D.C. Cir. 1988)).    
Here, the Court is persuaded that the Defendants’ strong interest in maintaining public 
trust outweighs the interest Hussey had in making his Facebook post.  The timing here is a 
crucial factor—Hussey’s statements came mere months after Floyd’s killing galvanized public 
criticism of policing and racial disparities, including in the City of Cambridge and the greater 
Boston area.8  The vast majority of protests were peaceful, yet departments across the country 
   7F                                                                
met many of those same protests with tear gas, arrests, flash grenades, and more—sometimes 
with fatal consequences for demonstrators.9  Some of the protests turned violent and the ensuing 
                       8F                                            
riots set ablaze local businesses, restaurants, news buildings, and even a police department 
building.10  A number of police officers sustained injuries during such incidents.11  In the weeks 
 9F                                             10F                  
that followed, as the names of more Black persons, like Breonna Taylor, became synonymous 
with police brutality and impunity, it poured fuel on the collective fury against police 
departments and ignited new rounds of protests.12  These demonstrations were often 
                           11F                                       
accompanied by calls to reform, defund, and even abolish police departments.13  It is thus 
                                               1F                    
understandable that in the months that followed, the Cambridge’s Police Department’s sensitivity 
to public perception was heightened, especially regarding discussions related to victims of police 
violence.                                                                 
The effectiveness of the Cambridge Police Department, and any police department, 
depends on the maintenance of public trust.  Acting in a biased manner, or creating a perception 

8 Supra note 3; Huffman, 2022 WL 2308937, at *1.                          

9 Olalekan N. Sumonu, Shot in the Streets, Buried in Courts: An Assault on Protester Rights, 52 Seton Hall L. Rev. 
1569 at 1573, 1575 (2022).  Around 570 of the 10,600 protests resulted in violence.  Id.  In Kentucky, the police 
response to a demonstration led to the death of a photographer named Tyler Gerth and a cook named David McAtee. 
Id.                                                                       

10 Id. at 1571-74.                                                        

11 Id.                                                                    

12 Id.                                                                    

13 Id.                                                                    
thereof, undermines that trust.14  Locurto v. Guiliani, 447 F.3d 159, 182 (2d Cir. 2006).  In 
               13F                                                   
Locurto, the Second Circuit articulated this challenge:                   
The effectiveness of a city’s police department depends importantly on the respect 
and trust of the community and on the perception in the community that it 
enforces the law fairly, even-handedly, and without bias. If the police department 
treats a segment of the population of any race, religion, gender, national origin, or 
sexual preference, etc., with contempt, so that the particular minority comes to 
regard the police as oppressor rather than protector, respect for law enforcement is 
eroded and the ability of the police to do its work in that community is impaired. 
Members of the minority will be less likely to report crimes, to offer testimony as 
witnesses, and to rely on the police for their protection. When the police make 
arrests in that community, its members are likely to assume that the arrests are a 
product of bias, rather than well-founded, protective law enforcement. And the 
department’s ability to recruit and train personnel from that community will be 
damaged.                                                             

Locurto, 447 F.3d at 178 (quoting Pappas v. Giuliani, 290 F.3d 143, 146-47 (2d Cir. 2002) 
(citations omitted)); see also Bennett, 977 F.3d 530, 544 (6th Cir. 2020) (“[D]iverse 
constituents . . . need to believe that those meant to help them in their most dire moments are 
fair-minded, unbiased, and worthy of their trust.”).15  The centrality of trust is highlighted by the 
                            14F                                      

14 The facts in cases like Locurto and Bennett, and other cases that the Defendant relies upon, such as Grutzmacher  
v. Howard Cnty., 851 F.3d 332, 338 (4th Cir. 2017) feature speech that is significantly more likely to offend and 
cause disruption in a workplace than Hussey’s Facebook post.  However, this Court does not cite those cases for 
their factual similarity but rather for their proposition that the effectiveness of a Police Department depends on their 
ability to build trust in the communities they serve and that incidents that undermine that trust, particular among 
communities where relationships with law enforcement is historically strained, can hamper a Police Department’s 
ability to carry out its duties.                                          

15 In resolving this question, the Court finds that community members’ objections regarding Hussey’s post are not 
analogous to a “heckler’s veto.” A “heckler’s veto” occurs when offensive speech is curtailed to prevent public 
disorder; the Supreme Court has held that the “heckler’s veto” is an impermissible justification for the restriction of 
speech.  Bachellar v. Maryland, 397 U.S. 564, 567 (1970) (“it is firmly settled that under our Constitution the public 
expression of ideas may not be prohibited merely because the ideas are themselves offensive to some of their 
hearers, or simply because bystanders object to peaceful and orderly demonstrations” (internal citations omitted)).  
Previously, the Fourth Circuit and Tenth Circuit have extended this logic to prevent restrictions on the speech of 
police officers that were motivated by potential community backlash.  Berger v. Battaglia, 779 F.2d 992, 1001 (4th 
Cir. 1985) (rejecting community concerns about an officer’s music performance in blackface because “the perceived 
threat of disruption [was] only to external operations and relationships, it was caused not by the speech itself but by 
threatened reaction to it by offended segments of the public”); Flanagan v. Munger, 890 F.2d 1557, 1566-67 (10th 
Cir. 1989) (citing Berger in its finding that the community’s objections to a police officer’s ownership of a video 
Cambridge Police Department’s Mission Statement, which describes the Department’s mission 
as partnering “with the community to solve problems and improve public safety in a manner that 
is fair, impartial, transparent, and consistent.”16                       
                         15F                                         
The Court must also provide greater deference to the Cambridge Police Department’s 
assessments of the risk of disruption because of its status as a law enforcement agency.  See 
Curran, 509 F.3d at 50; see also Hughes v. Whitmer, 714 F.2d 1407, 1419 (8th Cir. 1983) 
(“More so than the typical government employer, the Patrol has a significant government interest 
in regulating the speech activities of its officers in order ‘to promote efficiency, foster loyalty 
and obedience to superior officers, maintain morale, and instill public confidence in the law 
enforcement institution.’”) (quoting Gasparinetti v. Kerr, 568 F.2d 311, 315-16 (3rd Cir. 1977)); 
Oladeinde v. City of Birmingham, 230 F.3d 1275, 1293 (11th Cir. 2000) (“In a law enforcement 
agency, there is a heightened need for order, loyalty, morale and harmony, which affords a police 
department more latitude in responding to the speech of its officers than other government 
employers.”); O’Donnell v. Barry, 148 F.3d 1126, 1135 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (describing stronger 

government interest in regulating speech of police officers).  Following the national reckoning 

store that included adult films was not a sufficient rationale to justify restrictions on his speech).  In both matters, 
these complaints were analogized to a “heckler’s veto.”  Berger, 779 F.2d at 1001; Flanagan, 890 F.2d 1567.  The 
Ninth Circuit and Second Circuit have found that such objections are permissible to consider when assessing 
disruption to an employer’s function, such as ‘an officer’s job to safeguard public opinion of the police force.  
Locurto, 447 F.3d at 179 (2d Cir. 2006) (rejecting the analogy to a ‘heckler’s veto’ because “[w]here a Government 
employee’s job quintessentially involves public contact, the Government may take into account the public’s 
perception of that employee’s expressive acts in determining whether those acts are disruptive to the Government's 
operations”); Dible v. City of Chandler, 515 F.3d 918 n.4, 7 (9th Cir. 2008) (acknowledging Flannagan and Berger, 
but finding that they have both been undermined by subsequent case law, including City of San Diego, Cal. v. Roe, 
543 U.S. 77 (2004)). This Court similarly declines to follow Flannagan and Berger because of the now demonstrated 
connection between a police departments’ efficiency and its public perception and because the social context, 
including as to importance of the relationship between police and the communities they serve, has changed since 
those cases.                                                              

16 Mission Statement and Core Values, City of Cambridge Police Department, 
https://www.cambridgema.gov/Departments/cambridgepolice/missionstatementandcorevalues (last visited Mar. 5, 
2024).                                                                    
sparked by George Floyd’s murder,17 while police departments sought to rebuild trust in their 
                   16F                                               
communities, the need for this deference was even greater.18              
                                  17F                                
The community complaints about the Facebook post provide the necessary evidence to 
justify Defendants’ perception that Hussey’s comments could have undermined public trust.  
Less than one week after Hussey shared his Facebook post, Richard Harding of the Cambridge 
NAACP, brought the post to Commissioner Bard’s attention.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶ 19].  The NAACP 
had been made aware of the post when a screenshot was shared with them by another individual 
whose identity remains undisclosed.  [Bard Tr. at 31:7-12].  Bard and the Cambridge City 
Manager then met with Richard Harding, Mo Barbosa, and former Mayor Ken Reeves—all of 
whom were either in the leadership of the Cambridge chapter of the NAACP or involved 
community figures in other capacities.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶ 20; Bard Tr. at 26:17-24].  Even though 
Bard only met with three individuals, at least two were part of a larger organization, and one was 
a former Mayor of that very city.  The political clout of those individuals made it reasonable for 
Bard to assume that the post could cause damage to the Department’s reputation in the eyes of 





17 See Huffman, 2022 WL 2308937, at *1 (“[Floyd’s] unjust death at the hands of police sparked protests around the 
country that called attention to the disparate treatment of people of color by law enforcement and demanded justice 
and police reform.”).                                                     

18 This deference is why the Court is not persuaded by the counter-factual proposed by Plaintiff about an Officer 
suspended for a social media post criticizing the naming of a bill after President Donald Trump who also is the 
subject of several criminal misconduct allegations.  [Dkt. 58 at 3].  The distinction drawn here is not in regard to the 
speech’s content, but rather its context.  Even in the context of government employees, the First Amendment is 
particularly sensitive to speech restrictions that target speech solely based on its content. See Rankin, 483 U.S. at 
384.  However, the broader context regarding policing in America supports a heightened concern about breakdown 
of trust and disruption to the Department’s functions, and thus justifies such a restriction.  The example Plaintiff 
provides is distinguishable as it does not indicate how such a post would detrimentally impact police operations.  
many others, especially among those who were concerned about bias within the Cambridge 
Police Department.  [See Dkt. 52 at ¶ 68].19                              
                       18F                                           
Since the primary question is whether the Police Department’s prediction of disruption 
was reasonable, the level of community feedback that is sufficient to justify such a prediction is 
necessarily context dependent.  The case law does not identify any magic marker or bright line 
wherein the level of community feedback is sufficient to justify a speech restriction.  The Court 
also notes that the matter was presented to Bard as an urgent matter, with community members 
“alarmed and concerned about the post.”  [Bard Tr. at 49:1-14].  As Bard put it: “trust takes a 
lifetime to build and just a moment to tear down” and “any individual associated with the 
Cambridge Police Department could in a moment tear down . . . trust we’ve spent a long time 
building with community.”  [Dkt. 39 at ¶ 26].  With this in mind, Bard’s actions appear 
reasonable given the importance to the Department of maintaining the trust of its community 
members and the concern, especially given the “context of the national climate,” that the 
Facebook post could have detrimentally impacted that trust.  [Dkt. 39 at ¶ 26]; see Locurto, 447 

F.3d at 182; Bennett, 977 F.3d at 541.  The focus on the community impact renders it less 
relevant that Hussey received messages of support from his peers in the police department.   
[Dkt. 43 at ¶ 33; Dkt. 44-7].  The Court is also not persuaded by the fact that there is no evidence 
that any drug users or individuals with loved ones struggling with substance abuse complained as 


19 The fact that the organization that Bard met with was the NAACP is noteworthy as it is an organization whose 
chapters advocate against bias in policing. The NAACP’s mission is to “achieve equity, political rights, and social 
inclusion by advancing policies and practices that expand human and civil rights, eliminate discrimination, and 
accelerate the well-being, education, and economic security of Black people and all persons of color.” Mission-
Vision, NAACP, https://naacp.org/about/mission-vision (last visited Mar. 5, 2024). In the wake of George Floyd’s 
killing, the organization called for measures to be put in place to impose strict accountability for police misconduct. 
NAACP, Joint Statement by NAACP and The Links, Incorporated on Collective Outrage Regarding the Police 
Murder of George Floyd and other Victims of Law Enforcement, NAACP, https://naacp.org/articles/joint-statement-
naacp-and-links-incorporated-collective-outrage-regarding-police-murder (last visited Mar. 5, 2024).  
Commissioner Bard was entitled to rely on his own judgment given the “significant weight” 
allotted to an employers’ “reasonable predictions of disruption.”  Curran, 509 F.3d at 49. 
Hussey’s post was subject to multiple interpretations—including some which could 
undermine the non-punitive and rehabilitative approach that Bard and the Cambridge Police 

Department aimed to have.  Bard saw it as “dehumanizing” and insensitive to individuals with 
substance abuse histories.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶ 26].  The community members Bard met with saw it as 
evidence of bias within the Cambridge Police Department and counter to the spirit the 
Department should embody.  [Dkt. 52 at ¶ 68].  The City of Cambridge’s conclusion in its final 
report of its investigation was that Hussey’s Facebook post implied he “does not believe in 
rehabilitation . . . is disrespectful of people suffering from substance abuse” and that it “can be 
interpreted that the Cambridge Police have a bias against people who have committed felony 
crimes or have a substance abuse disorder.”  [Dkt. 44-3 at 12].  Hussey, for his part, asserts that 
his post had nothing to do with race, that his only objection was the naming of the bill (whose 
objectives he otherwise supported) in “honor” of someone who had a violent criminal past.  [Dkt. 

43 at ¶ 32].   The Defendants’ arguments do not focus directly on concerns about an appearance 
of racial bias—even though George Floyd’s death is inseparable from issues of racial bias in 
policing and the post was brought to the Department’s attention by the NAACP, a racial justice 
organization.                                                             
The focus of the Court’s inquiry, however, is not what the right interpretation of Hussey’s 
language is, or even whether it was offensive or its conclusions objectionable, but rather whether 
its impact “impedes the performance” of or “interferes with the regular operation” of the 
Cambridge Police Department’s work.  Rankin, 483 U.S. at 388.  In that regard, the 
Department’s concerns are substantiated by the language Hussey used, the reasonable 
interpretation of the implications of his words, and by the objections Bard, and other community 
members, raised in response.                                              
 Bard was not obligated to wait until the issue developed into a broader controversy, 
particularly given his concerns about the backlash the Facebook post could generate and his 

assessment that its characterization of George Floyd undermined the Department’s goals.  [See 
Dkt. 43 at ¶ 25; Bard Tr. at 40:7-19]; see Curran, 509 F.3d at 45 (“An employer need not ‘allow 
events to unfold to the extent that the disruption of the office and the destruction of working 
relationships is manifest before taking action.’”) (quoting Connick, 461 U.S. at 152).  According 
to Bard, the goals of the Cambridge Police Department when addressing drug abuse was to 
prefer “prevention, intervention, and diversion over more serious or more punitive methods 
traditionally associated with the criminal justice system,” which often meant that officers had to 
work with individuals struggling with substance abuse issues.  [Dkt. 39 at ¶ 25].  Hussey, as a 
member of the SIU, would have been one of the officers working to implement those goals by 
attempting to build trust within communities where drug use was a widespread and serious 

challenge.  [Dkt. 39 at ¶¶ 11-16].  Bard’s assessment is supported by the fact that Hussey’s 
comments undermined the Department’s stated goals.                        
The heightened scrutiny on Hussey’s public comments is connected to the fact that a 
police officer is an especially public-facing role, and “[t]he more the employee's job requires . . . 
public contact, the greater the state’s interest” in disciplining them for comments that are 
offensive.  Grutzmacher v. Howard Cnty., 851 F.3d 332, 346 (4th Cir. 2017) (quoting McEvoy v. 
Spencer, 124 F.3d 92, 103 (2d Cir. 1997) (citation omitted)).  The Fourth Circuit noted this in 
Grutzmacher, wherein a firefighter was terminated for several offensive comments he made on 
his Facebook page.  Grutzmacher, 851 F.3d at 346.  The court dismissed plaintiff’s claim therein, 
in part, because the plaintiffs’ job required him to safeguard public opinion about his role; by 
making comments which jeopardized the public’s trust in firefighters, he frustrated the Fire 
Department’s public safety mission.  Id.  This difference is also what separates Hussey’s case 
here from the District of Massachusetts’ decision in Hayes v. Mass. Bay Transp. Auth., which 
also addressed restrictions on government speech.  498 F. Supp. 3d at 236.20   Hayes concerned 
                                            19F                      
comments made in the workplace by a 911 operator, rather than someone in a public-facing role.  
As a police officer, Hussey’s work is public-facing and thus more scrutiny is placed upon his 
comments that are made in public, or in the semi-public sphere of social media.  Hussey’s post 
may have been on his private Facebook page, but it was shared online with hundreds of people.  
While he may have believed his post was only shared among his friends, it led to a community 
response, through NAACP officers, which then reached his police commissioner.   
This Court’s conclusion is reached as a matter of law, after weighing Hussey’s interest in 
his post against his employer’s interest in the potential damage it could have caused.  See Curran, 
509 F.3d at 50.  Maintaining the public’s confidence in the Cambridge Police Department is part 

of Hussey’s job responsibilities; therefore, the Departments’ objections to the content of 
Hussey’s statement is invariably linked to their concern about its impact on their image.  On that 
issue, with greater deference afforded to law enforcement and with the record clear regarding the 


20 Additional factual differences further separate this case from Hayes.  In Hayes, 911 call center operator Mark 
Hayes was overheard saying “she should go back to Africa” in response to a news broadcast in which a naturalized 
citizen from the Democratic Republic of Congo criticized US immigration policy.  498 F. Supp. 3d at 227.  The 
remark caused a “ruckus” in the call center and plaintiff was fired thereafter; Hayes then sued alleging his First 
Amendment rights had been violated.  Id.  The court therein held that there was a jury question as to whether the 
motivation of the employer in terminating the employee was either based on their personal objection to his statement 
or on their concern for the workplace disruption it could cause.  Id. at 234.  The possibility that it was the former 
was supported in part by the fact that the manager did not speak with other employers before terminating Hayes and 
because Hayes did not receive an opportunity to apologize to his coworkers who heard the comment—which could 
have impacted the degree of workplace disruption.  Id.  Additionally, there was a question of fact as to whether 
Hayes’s statement was made to himself or to others, which would have altered the degree of First Amendment 
protection it would have received.  Id. at 233.                           
objections raised about Hussey’s post by both Bard and members of the public, this case does not 
present a factual dispute which a jury need resolve.                      
Plaintiff draws an analogy here to Ninth Circuit and Third Circuit authority, but the cases 
he highlights do not control here because of the differences in procedural posture and the 

evidence demonstrating potential disruption.  In Moser, a Las Vegas SWAT sniper was 
dismissed from his team because of a comment he made on his Facebook page, including that “it 
was a ‘shame’ that a suspect who had shot a police officer did not have any ‘holes’ in him.”  984 
F.3d at 902.  The Ninth Circuit reversed the District Court’s decision because there was a factual 
dispute over the meaning of his Facebook comments and because the Defendant did not provide 
sufficient evidence to show the comments would have caused disruption.  Id. at 908, 910.  
However, there was no indication of disruption either internally or externally.  Id. at 909-11.  The 
post was brought to the department’s attention through an anonymous comment, but otherwise 
the record failed to show that anyone else saw the comment.  Id. at 910.  Therefore, in Moser, 
“the public did not see or hear the offending comment, which lessen[ed] the potential impact on 

the agency’s reputation or mission.”  Id. at 911.  Not so here.  Hussey’s post may have been up 
for a short time, but it was put into the public sphere long enough to attract a controversy that 
could have negatively impacted the Cambridge Police Department.  [See Dkts. 43 at ¶¶ 17, 19-
21; 52 at ¶ 68; 39 at ¶¶ 24-26].                                          
 In Fenico, the Third Circuit reversed the dismissal of a First Amendment retaliation 
claim brought by a group of police officers who had made social media posts that were clearly 
“offensive, racist, and violent.”  Fenico, 70 F.4th at 153.  That initial dismissal came at the 
motion to dismiss stage with an undeveloped factual record and wherein the appellate court had 
to view the allegations in the light most favorable to the officers.  Id. at 155.  Thus, the court had 
to assume “that their posts had not and would not disrupt [Philadelphia Police Department] 
operations.”  Id. at 167 (emphasis in original).  This Court used similar reasoning when it denied 
the Defendants’ Motion to Dismiss.  [Dkt. 25 at 13].  While the Court here must still evaluate 
Defendant’ Motion for Summary Judgment by viewing “the record and [drawing] all reasonable 

inferences therefrom in the light most favorable” to Plaintiff, the facts it is evaluating are based 
on a developed factual record which details the reaction from community members.  Hevia, 602 
F.3d at 40.  As such, the Court is no longer required to presume that no disruption would take 
place.                                                                    
Cambridge Police Department’s Failure to Address Other Comments           
Finally, the government’s claims are not weakened by their failure to take action in other 
instances where officers made similar comments.  Such evidence of the “failure to target equally 
disruptive speech is probative” of the legitimacy, or lack thereof, of Defendants’ predictions of 
disruption.  Amalgamated Transit Union Loc. 85 v. Port Auth. of Allegheny Cnty., 39 F.4th 95, 
107 (3d Cir. 2022) (quoting Lodge No. 5 of Fraternal Ord. of Police ex rel. McNesby v. City of 

Phila., 763 F.3d 358, 384 (3d Cir. 2014)).  In other words, if Plaintiff demonstrates that 
Defendants failed to address similar comments by other employees, it calls into question whether 
the motivation for the disciplinary action was for reasons other than those provided—such as 
their personal disagreement with the Plaintiff’s message.  The issue here, however, is that the 
examples cited by Plaintiff either differ in terms of the Department’s authority over them or 
show that some disciplinary measures were indeed taken.  Jack Albert, who posted a tweet on the 
department’s official Twitter page calling Congressmen Joe Kennedy III a “liberal [****]ing 
jerk” received a five-day suspension for his post, although he was not placed on administrative 
leave initially.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶¶ 37-39].  The Cambridge Police Department did, in fact, fail to 
investigate who wrote a tweet on the Cambridge Police Patrol Officers Association’s account 
warning about a “purge” of killings it predicted would follow the passing of a proposed police 
reform bill.  [Dkt. 43 at ¶¶ 40-41].  However, the Patrol Officers Association is a separate and 
distinct entity.  Plaintiff has not persuaded the Court that the Police Department’s failure to 

investigate the anonymous Association’s tweet is comparable to Hussey’s Facebook post, as 
there is no evidence provided in the record of any backlash, internally or externally, to the 
Association’s tweet.  The same is true of an unnamed officer who made a “deeply disturbing” 
social media post in praise of political violence.  [See Dkt. 43 at ¶ 43].  These parallel examples 
the Plaintiff highlights are notable, but because details about them are so limited they are not 
sufficient to create a material dispute of facts as to the legitimacy of Defendants’ predictions of 
disruption.  The Court reaches the same conclusion regarding the facts about both Hussey and 
Commissioner Elow using derogatory language, such as “crackheads,” to describe drug users.  
[Dkt. 43 at ¶¶ 46, 48-49].                                                
IV.  CONCLUSION                                                           

Ensuring the free participation of the people in discussions of public affairs is of 
paramount importance—including for individuals who are employed by the public.  The Court 
recognizes a limited exception to that principle here because the Defendants’ disciplinary actions 
were reasonably calculated to prevent disruption to the Cambridge Police Department, via a 
further breakdown of trust from community members, that Plaintiff’s comments could have 
caused.  For this, and the additional reasons stated above, the Defendants’ Motion for Summary 
Judgment [Dkt. 37] is GRANTED and Plaintiff’s Partial Motion for Summary Judgment [Dkt. 
41] is DENIED.  This matter is DISMISSED.                                 
SO ORDERED.                                                          
Dated: March 12, 2024                   /s/ Angel Kelley                   
                                   Hon. Angel Kelley                 
                                   United States District Judge

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
              DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                              
____________________________________                                      
                         )                                           
BRIAN HUSSEY,                 )                                           
                         )                                           
     Plaintiff,          )                                           
                         )                                           
                         )                                           
v.                            )                                           
                         )    Civil Action No. 21-CV-11868-AK        
CITY OF CAMBRIDGE and         )                                           
BRANVILLE BARD, individually and  )                                       
in his capacity as Commissioner of the   )                                
Cambridge Police Department,    )                                         
                         )                                           
     Defendants.         )                                           
                                                                   ) 

               MEMORANDUM AND ORDER                                  
A. KELLEY, D.J.                                                           
Brian Hussey (“Hussey”), a police officer for the City of Cambridge Police Department 
(“CPD”), brings this action, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983, against the City of Cambridge (the 
“City”) and Branville Bard (“Bard”), the previous Commissioner of the CPD, in his individual 
and official capacities, alleging that the defendants violated his First Amendment right to 
freedom of speech.  The defendants filed a motion to dismiss [Dkt. 9], which Hussey opposes.  
For the reasons that follow, the defendants’ motion to dismiss [Dkt. 9] is GRANTED IN PART 
and DENIED IN PART.                                                       
I.   Factual and Procedural Background                                    
Unless otherwise noted, the facts are recited as alleged in Hussey’s complaint.  [See Dkt. 
1 (“Complaint”)].  Hussey has worked as a police officer for the CPD for twenty-four years.  [Id. 
at ¶ 1].  Hussey maintains a private Facebook page, which does not identify him as a police 
officer, where he occasionally posts personal and political comments or articles.  [Id. at ¶ 9].  On 
or about February 25, 2021, while off duty, Hussey posted an article titled “House Democrats 
Reintroduce Police Reform Bill Named in Honor of George Floyd,” along with the comment, 
“This is what its [sic] come to ‘honoring’ a career criminal, a thief and druggie . . . the future of 
this country is bleak at best.”  [Id. at ¶¶ 10-11].  Hussey states that the motivation behind this 

post was his “concern[] as a private citizen that an important act of Congress would be named ‘in 
honor’ of someone who was reported to have a criminal record.”  [Id.].  Hussey took the post 
down approximately two hours after posting.  [Id. at ¶ 12].  In March 2021, Bard informed 
Hussey that he was being placed on administrative leave because of the Facebook post.  [Id. at 
¶ 13].  Hussey was on administrative leave for two months before receiving a four-day 
suspension.  [Id.].  Hussey claims that this punishment violated his First Amendment right to the 
freedom of speech and seeks monetary damages in addition to declaratory and injunctive relief.  
[Id. at ¶¶ 14-16].                                                        
The defendants moved to dismiss Hussey’s complaint pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil 
Procedure 12(b)(6).  [Dkt. 9].  Hussey opposed that motion.  [Dkt. 13].  The Court held a motion 
hearing on September 26, 2022.1                                           

II.  Legal Standard                                                       
To survive a motion to dismiss under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6), a 
complaint must allege sufficient facts to state a claim for relief that is “plausible on its face” and 
actionable as a matter of law.  Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678 (2009) (quoting Bell Atl. 


1 Shortly after filing his opposition, Hussey moved to supplement and amend his complaint.  [Dkt. 14].  In 
his proposed amended complaint, Hussey does not allege any new underlying facts related to the 
Facebook post or suspension.  Instead, he adds claims that he was denied a promotion to sergeant in April 
2022, after filing this suit, because of the discipline he received in response to the Facebook post.  [Dkt. 
14-1 at ¶ 18].  At the motion hearing on September 26, 2022, counsel informed the Court that Hussey had 
since been promoted to sergeant and Hussey’s counsel therefore intended to withdraw the motion to 
amend the complaint.  As such, the Court denied as moot Hussey’s motion to amend.  [See Dkt. 24]. 
Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007)).  Reading the complaint “as a whole,” the Court 
must conduct a two-step, context-specific inquiry.  García-Catalán v. United States, 734 F.3d 
100, 103 (1st Cir. 2013).  First, the Court must perform a close reading of the complaint to 
distinguish factual allegations from conclusory legal statements.  Id.  Factual allegations must be 

accepted as true, while legal conclusions are not entitled to credit.  Id.  A court may not disregard 
properly pleaded factual allegations even if actual proof of those facts is improbable.  Ocasio-
Hernández v. Fortuño-Burset, 640 F.3d 1, 12 (1st Cir. 2011).  Second, the Court must determine 
whether the factual allegations present a “reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the 
misconduct alleged.”  Haley v. City of Bos., 657 F.3d 39, 46 (1st Cir. 2011) (citation omitted).  
Dismissal is appropriate when the complaint fails to allege a “plausible entitlement to relief.”  
Rodriguez-Ortiz v. Margo Caribe, Inc., 490 F.3d 92, 95 (1st Cir. 2007) (quoting Bell Atl. Corp. 
v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 559 (2007)).  When resolving a motion to dismiss under Federal Rule 
of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6), the Court is generally limited to “the complaint, documents attached 
to it, and documents expressly incorporated into it,” Foley v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., 772 F.3d 

63, 71-72 (1st Cir. 2014), though the Court may also consider “matters of public record[] and 
other matters susceptible to judicial notice,” Newton Covenant Church v. Great Am. Ins. Co., 
956 F.3d 32, 35 (1st Cir. 2020).                                          
III.  Discussion                                                          
Hussey brings this action pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983.  Section 1983 provides that 
“[e]very person” acting “under color of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage of 
any State or Territory or the District of Columbia” who subjects or causes to subject someone “to 
the deprivation of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by the Constitution and laws” of 
the United States shall be liable to the injured party.  42 U.S.C. § 1983.  An individual asserting a 
Section 1983 claim must show that the challenged conduct is “attributable to a person acting 
under color of state law” and that the conduct was a “denial of rights secured by the Constitution 
or by federal law.”  Soto v. Flores, 103 F.3d 1056, 1061 (1st Cir. 1997); see Graham v. Connor, 
490 U.S. 386, 393-94 (1989) (explaining that Section 1983 is “not itself a source of substantive 

rights, but merely provides a method for vindicating federal rights elsewhere conferred” (citation 
omitted)).  In this case, the defendants do not dispute that they were acting “under color of state 
law.”  Rather, they contend that the injuries alleged do not amount to a violation of Hussey’s 
First Amendment rights because he was not engaged in protected speech.2  In the alternative, 
they argue that Bard did not have final policymaking authority over the disciplinary action taken, 
and the City therefore cannot be held liable pursuant to Section 1983, and that Bard is entitled to 
qualified immunity, which “protects government officials . . . from suit and liability for monetary 
damages under [Section] 1983,” as to the individual capacity claim against him.  Acevedo-Garcia 
v. Vera-Monroig, 204 F.3d 1, 10 (1st Cir. 2000)).  Hussey counters that he was engaged in 
protected speech and that Bard was the final policymaking authority as to officer discipline and 

is not entitled to qualified immunity.  [Dkt. 13 at 1-4].                 
A.  Protected Speech                                                 
The threshold question is whether Hussey has alleged facts sufficient to plead a First 
Amendment violation, which requires the speech at issue to be protected.  Although public 
employees like Hussey “do not forfeit all of their First Amendment rights by undertaking public 
employment,” the protection public employees enjoy “against speech-based reprisals is 
qualified.”  Decotiis v. Whittemore, 635 F.3d 22, 29 (1st Cir. 2011) (citing Mercado-Berrios v. 
Cancel-Alegria, 611 F.3d 18, 25-26 (1st Cir. 2010)).  Government employees “often occupy 

2 The First Amendment was incorporated against the states by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendment.  See Grosjean v. Am. Press Co., 297 U.S. 233, 243 (1936).      
trusted positions in society” and when they speak out “they can express views that contravene 
governmental policies or impair the proper performance of governmental functions.”  Garcetti v. 
Ceballos, 547 U.S. 410, 419 (2006); see Curran v. Cousins, 509 F.3d 36, 47 (1st Cir. 2007).  
Consequently, when a citizen “enters government service, the citizen by necessity must accept 

certain limitations on his or her freedom.”  Garcetti, 547 U.S at 418.  The Court must apply a 
three-part test to determine whether a government employer has violated an employee’s right to 
free speech by taking an adverse action against him, considering whether (1) the employee spoke 
as a citizen on “a matter of public concern”; (2) the government employer had an “adequate 
justification for treating the employee differently from any other member of the general public,” 
that is, whether the interests of the employee and public “outweigh the government’s interest in 
functioning efficiently”; and (3) whether the protected speech “was a substantial motivating 
factor in the adverse action” against the employee.  Bruce v. Worcester Reg’l Transit Auth., 34 
F.4th 129, 135, 138 (1st Cir. 2022); see also Borrás-Borrero v. Corporación del Fondo del 
Seguro del Estado, 958 F.3d 26, 34 (1st Cir. 2020) (citing Rosado-Quiñones v. Toledo, 528 F.3d 

1, 15 (1st Cir. 2008)); Decotiis, 635 F.3d at 29.                         
The parties here do not dispute the first and third elements.  Therefore, the Court’s 
analysis will focus on the second element, often referred to as the “Pickering test”: balancing the 
employee and the public’s interests in the employee’s speech against the “interest of the 
[government], as an employer, in promoting the efficiency of the public services it performs 
through its employees.”  Jordan v. Carter, 428 F.3d 67, 73 (1st Cir. 2005) (citing Pickering v. Bd. 
of Educ., 391 U.S. 563, 568 (1968)).  The resolution of this inquiry is a matter of law for the 
Court to decide, id., though it does require a “look at the facts of the case, including the nature of 
the employment and the context in which the employee spoke,” Hayes v. Mass. Bay Transp. 
Auth., 498 F. Supp. 3d 224, 232 (D. Mass. 2020).  As part of this inquiry, the Court considers the 
“time, place, and manner of the employee’s speech” and the interests of the government, 
including its motivation, when making the adverse employment decision.  Bruce, 34 F.4th at 138 
(citing Decotiis, 635 F.3d at 35).  This balancing test reflects the fact that government employers 

“like private employers, need a significant degree of control over their employees’ words and 
actions,” because “without it, there would be little chance for the efficient provision of public 
services.”  Garcetti, 547 U.S. at 418.                                    
The defendants argue that Hussey’s Facebook post does not constitute protected speech 
because the interests of the City in “maintaining a police department free of bias and in 
maintaining public trust far outweigh” Hussey’s interests.  [Dkt. 10 at 5-10].   Hussey counters 
that he has alleged facts sufficient to survive dismissal, namely, that his Facebook post is 
protected speech, and the defendants have not shown that his speech caused or risked causing 
any disruption to their government interest.  [Dkt. 13 at 6, 12-13].      
     1.  Hussey’s Interest                                           

At the heart of Hussey’s speech is the murder of George Floyd, an African-American 
man, who was killed by then-Officer Derek Chauvin (“Chauvin”) on May 25, 2020, while in the 
custody of the Minneapolis Police Department.3  See Armstrong v. City of Minneapolis, 525 F. 
Supp. 3d 954, 957 (D. Minn. 2021); see also How George Floyd Died, and What Happened 
Next, N.Y. Times, https://www.nytimes.com/article/george-floyd.html [hereinafter “N.Y. Times 
Article”]; House Democrats Reintroduce Police Reform Bill Named in Honor of George Floyd, 


3 Officer Chauvin was found guilty of second-degree murder, third-degree murder, and second-degree 
manslaughter for the death of George Floyd on April 20, 2021.  See State v. Chauvin, No. 27-cr-20-12646 
(Minn. Apr. 20, 2021); see also N.Y. Times Article (noting that Chauvin was found guilty of second-
degree murder, third-degree murder, and second-degree manslaughter after “a weekslong trial” and 
sentenced to 22.5 years in prison).                                       
CNN (February 25, 2021), https://whdh.com/news/politics/house-democrats-reintroduce-police-
reform-bill-named-in-honor-of-george-floyd/ [hereinafter “CNN WHDH Article”].4  The cell 
phone video of Chauvin, a white police officer, “kneeling on George Floyd’s neck for several 
minutes” while George Floyd was handcuffed, pinned to the ground, and “begged for his life” as 

other officers stood by and watched was “circulated nationwide and ignited protests across the 
country” and internationally.  Black Lives Matter L.A. v. City of L.A., No. 20-cv-05027, 2021 
WL 3163309, at *1 (C.D. Cal. May 10, 2021); see also N.Y. Times Article; CNN WHDH 
Article.  Although Chauvin and the other officers involved were eventually arrested and charged 
with George Floyd’s murder, protests peaceful and violent continued throughout the country and 
abroad in the following months.  See N.Y. Times Article; CNN WHDH Article.  While the 
majority of the protests were peaceful, some turned violent.  Law enforcement was criticized by 
some for responding to the majority peaceful protests with force, including the use of tear gas 
and shooting of rubber bullets, and with mass arrests.  N.Y. Times Article.  The National Guard 
was activated in at least twenty-one states, and cities enacted curfews as protestors and law 

enforcement clashed.  See id.  Businesses were set on fire and vandalized, and a Minneapolis 
police station was burned down.  Id.                                      
These “large protests against police brutality and systematic racism” led “to a racial 
justice movement not seen since the civil rights protests of the 1960s.”  N.Y. Times Article; see 
CNN WHDH Article; see also Huffman v. City of Boston, No. 21-cv-10986-ADB, 2022 WL 

4 The parties did not object when the Court informed them at the motion hearing that it intended to take 
judicial notice of these two articles, the first of which is referenced in the defendants’ papers, and the 
second of which is referenced in the plaintiff’s complaint.  See Watterson v. Page, 987 F.2d 1, 3 (1st Cir. 
1993) (noting that courts may consider “documents the authenticity of which are not disputed by the 
parties,” “official public records,” “documents central to [the plaintiff’s] claims,” and “documents 
sufficiently referred to in the complaint” when evaluating a motion to dismiss); see also Madison v. Cruz, 
393 F. Supp. 3d 135, 137 n.2 (D. Mass. 2019) (noting that “[o]ther courts have also taken judicial notice 
of newspaper articles and press releases . . . when their conten[t]s cannot be reasonably questioned”).   
2308937, at *1 (D. Mass. June 27, 2022) (“[George Floyd’s] unjust death at the hands of police 
sparked protests around the country that called attention to the disparate treatment of people of 
color by law enforcement and demanded justice and police reform.”).  The bill introduced by 
Congress—the subject of the article posted by Hussey—included provisions to overhaul the 

qualified immunity defense for law enforcement and establish a national registry of police 
misconduct; prohibitions on racial profiling and no-knock warrants in federal drug cases; and a 
ban on chokeholds at the federal level, classifying them as a civil rights violation.  CNN WHDH 
Article.                                                                  
Considering the impact of George Floyd’s murder on American society, Hussey’s 
Facebook post spoke broadly to several topics—use of force by law enforcement, police reform, 
and racial justice—on which “free and open debate is vital to informed decision-making.”  
Pickering, 391 U.S. at 571.  Viewed in that light, the value of the speech is high, as the public 
“also had a non-trivial interest in the information” conveyed.  Decotiis, 635 F.3d at 36.  
However, the Court must also “factor in particulars such as the nature of the comments and the 

motivation behind the speech.”  Jordan, 428 F.3d at 74.  Here, Hussey “put [the] pejorative 
labels” of “career criminal,” “thief,” and “druggie” on George Floyd, a victim of murder at the 
hands of those obliged to protect and serve the public, and whose unjust death sparked a global 
movement calling for police reform and racial justice.  Curran, 509 F.3d at 45 (citing Jordan, 428 
F.3d at 74).  Employee speech that is done in a “vulgar, insulting, and defiant” manner is 
generally “entitled to less weight in the Pickering balance.”  Jordan, 428 F.3d at 74 (citing 
Stanley v. City of Dalton, 219 F.3d 1280, 1290 (11th Cir. 2000)); see Snipes v. Volusia County, 
704 Fed. Appx. 848, 854 (11th Cir. 2017) (noting that there “are many ways to communicate 
ones’ thoughts, and the vulgar, derogatory phrases used by [the employee] weigh against him”).  
Still, the Court acknowledges that George Floyd’s past, who is at the center of Hussey’s speech, 
is “potentially of public concern” as it relates to any perceived message sent by the federal 
legislature.  Jordan, 428 F.3d at 74.                                     
Hussey’s motive for speaking must also be considered.  Id.  Hussey claims that his 

Facebook post was intended to express his concern “that an important act of Congress would be 
named ‘in honor’ of someone who was reported to have a criminal record.”  [Complaint at ¶ 11].  
At this stage, the Court must accept Hussey’s statement as true without evaluating his credibility.  
See García-Catalán, 734 F.3d at 103.  Hussey’s speech, then, intended to express disapproval of 
Washington politics, including legislative naming conventions, a “topic[] of value in the civil 
discourse,” and “provid[ed] information in which there was a legitimate public interest.”  Curren, 
509 F.3d at 48.  Still, on its face, Hussey’s post was “open to [] many controversial 
interpretations” and “was likely offensive to some members of the public” and fellow officers in 
the CPD.  Duke v. Hamil, 997 F. Supp. 2d 1291, 1302 (N.D. Ga. 2014) (dismissing a veteran 
police officer’s First Amendment claim where the officer posted an image of the Confederate 

flag accompanied by the phrase, “It’s time for the second revolution,” on his private Facebook 
page).  The very fact that his message could be misinterpreted by the public and police staff 
speaks to the defendants’ interests in regulating such speech.  See id.   
As to the time and place of Hussey’s Facebook post, Hussey uploaded the article and his 
comment to his private Facebook page, which he states does not identify him as a police officer, 
while off duty, and he removed the post a few hours later.  [Complaint at ¶¶ 9-12].  This 
generally weighs in Hussey’s favor.  Yet the post clearly came to Bard’s attention despite 
Hussey’s efforts to delete the post, which “illustrates the very gamble individuals take in posting 
content on the Internet and the frequent lack of control one has over its further dissemination.”  
Duke, 997 F. Supp. 2d at 1302.  Hussey could not prevent anyone from sharing, copying, or 
forwarding his message to others, even if he set his Facebook page at the strictest privacy 
settings.  Moreover, Hussey’s post came less than a year after George Floyd’s murder and the 
summer of unprecedented worldwide protests and barely a week before Chauvin’s Minnesota 

trial for George Floyd’s murder began.  See State v. Chauvin, No. 27-cr-20-12646 (Minn.) (trial 
beginning on March 8, 2021).                                              
As a whole, the value of Hussey’s speech, including his use of derogatory, pejorative 
labels, was not particularly high, though it was also not without any value.  See McGunigle v. 
City of Quincy, 132 F. Supp. 3d 155, 172 (D. Mass. 2015) (noting that the “greater the value of 
the subject of the speech to the public, the more the balance tilts” in the employee’s favor (citing 
Guilloty Perez v. Pierluisi, 339 F.3d 43, 53 (1st Cir. 2003))).  The question is whether the 
government’s interest outweighs Hussey’s.                                 
     2.  The Government’s Interest                                   
When evaluating the government’s interest in regulating employee speech, the Court 

must consider “the government’s interest in the effective and efficient fulfillment of its 
responsibilities to the public” and its “legitimate purpose” in promoting “efficiency and integrity 
in the discharge of official duties” and “proper discipline in the public service.”  Connick, 461 
U.S. 138, 150-51 (1983) (citing Ex parte Curtis, 106 U.S. 371, 373 (1882)).  The First Circuit 
and other courts have recognized that the government’s interest is “particularly acute in the 
context of law enforcement,” where there is a “heightened interest” in “maintaining discipline 
and harmony among employees.”  Jordan, 428 F.3d at 74 (citing Moore v. Wynnewood, 57 F.3d 
924, 934 (10th Cir. 1995)); see, e.g., O’Donnell v. Barry, 148 F.3d 1126, 1135 (D.C. Cir. 1998) 
(“[B]ecause of the special degree of trust and discipline required in a police force there may be a 
stronger governmental interest in regulating the speech of police officers than in regulating the 
speech of other governmental employees.”).  The defendants contend that they have “a strong 
interest in maintaining a police department free of bias and maintaining public trust” and that the 
defendants can “effectively provide the critical public safety services of its police department” 

only if “its officers are unbiased and the public has trust in the officers.”  [Dkt. 10 at 8-9].   
Hussey counters that the defendants’ “speculation about workplace disruption is not sufficient” 
and “language that is considered to be inflammatory is simply not enough to establish that the 
speech will sufficiently impact the operations of a public employer.”  [Dkt. 13 at 13-14]. 
Hussey’s Facebook post “on its face . . . could convey a drastically different message 
with different implications” than his intended disapproval of Washington politics and legislative 
naming conventions.  Duke, 997 F. Supp. 2d at 1301.  George Floyd’s murder is inextricably tied 
to discussions about police brutality and racial justice, and it is a topic that may be deemed 
“controversial, divisive, and prejudicial.”  Id.  It is not unreasonable to conclude that Hussey’s 
comments could sow discord among his fellow officers, and his senior status on the force could 

only heighten this friction.  See id. at 1303.  Indeed, Hussey’s Facebook post came to Bard’s 
attention, which suggests that at least one person was concerned about its effect on the CPD.  
When trust among officers can literally save—or ruin—lives, law enforcement understandably 
must be careful to monitor charged statements that risk dividing the force’s ranks.  
Also of tantamount importance to any police department is ensuring that the public 
perceives its officers and their enforcement of the law to “be even-handed and fair,” McGunigle, 
132 F. Supp. 3d at 173, as the “promotion of safety of persons and property is unquestionably at 
the core of the State’s police power,” Kelley v. Johnson, 425 U.S. 238, 247 (1976).  Police 
officers “are quintessentially public servants” and “part of their job is to safeguard the public’s 
opinion of them, particularly with regard to a community’s view of the respect that police 
officers . . . accord the members of that community.”  Locurto v. Giuliani, 447 F.3d 159, 178-79 
(2d Cir. 2006); see Duke, 997 F. Supp. 2d at 1301.  Hussey’s Facebook post had the potential to 
damage CPD’s reputation and to undermine the community’s confidence in CPD’s willingness to 

fulfill its duty to protect all members of the community and respect the constitutional rights of 
those in its custody.  See Snipes, 704 Fed. Appx. at 853.  People in the community could take 
offense to Hussey’s speech “not just because they disapprove of it, but because it raises concerns 
of [Hussey’s] prejudice—and the [police] [d]epartment’s.”  Duke, 997 F. Supp. 2d at 1302.  A 
police department and the public must be able to trust that officers will not justify the use of 
unlawful force or other illicit disparate treatment or targeting of individuals because of their race 
and backgrounds.                                                          
Still, the Court must consider whether the defendants’ predictions about the disruption 
Hussey’s speech would have on their interests were reasonable.  See Curran, 509 F.3d at 49 
(noting that a government employer “need not show an actual adverse effect” on the public 

employer’s operations to terminate an employee for something that employee said); see also 
Sabatini v. Las Vegas Metro. Police Dept., 369 F. Supp. 3d 1066, 1077, 1091 (D. Nev. 2019); 
Venable v. Metro. Gov’t of Nashville, 430 F. Supp. 3d 350, 360 (M.D. Tenn. 2019); Buker v. 
Howard Cty., No. MJG-12-cv-03046, MJG-13-cv-03747, 2015 WL 3456750, at *12-13 (D. Md. 
May 27, 2015).  Hussey’s complaint does not allege that any actual disruption or harm resulted 
from Hussey’s Facebook post, nor do the defendants describe any such consequences.  There is 
nothing to indicate that Hussey’s Facebook post was reported by local media, see Locurto, 447 
F.3d at 165, undermined CPD outreach to the community, see Venable, 430 F. Supp. 3d at 360, 
violated any CPD policies or diversity initiatives, see Hernandez v. City of Phx., 432 F. Supp. 3d 
1049, 1067-68 (D. Ariz. 2020), or was talked about by his fellow officers, see Buker, 2015 WL 
3456750, at *12, all of which could support the government’s prediction that Hussey’s speech 
would harm its strong interest in maintaining the public trust and a bias-free police department.  
While Hussey’s post could undermine the community’s trust in the CPD and relationships 

between officers, resulting in “significant disruption and inefficiency,” the Court cannot, based 
on the facts in the complaint before it, definitively resolve the close constitutional question of 
whether “such a risk” outweighs the interests served by Hussey’s speech.  Decotiis, 635 F.3d at 
36; Jordan, 428 F.3d at 74; see Gargano v. Liberty Int’l Underwriters, Inc., 572 F.3d 45, 48 (1st 
Cir. 2009) (noting that the court must “accept as true all well-pleaded facts in the complaint and 
draw all reasonable inferences in favor of the plaintiffs” at the motion to dismiss stage).  Given 
that the Court must “indulge all inferences in favor of” Hussey at this stage, the complaint 
sufficiently states a plausible claim to relief.  Id.  The Court cannot grant the defendants’ motion 
to dismiss in its entirety.                                               
B.  Bard’s Final Policymaking Authority                              

The defendants alternatively argue that Bard did not have final policymaking authority 
over the discipline of officers, and the City therefore cannot be held liable pursuant to Section 
1983.  [Dkt. 10 at 11-13].  A municipality can be liable for a constitutional violation “only if the 
violation occurs pursuant to an official policy or custom,” where the existence of an official 
policy can be established by “showing that the alleged constitutional injury was caused by . . . a 
person with final policymaking authority.”  Welch v. Ciampa, 542 F.3d 927, 941 (1st Cir. 2008) 
(citations omitted).  A “single decision by municipal policymakers” can lead to municipal 
liability when “the decisionmaker possesses final authority to establish municipal policy with 
respect to the action ordered.”  Pembaur v. City of Cincinnati, 475 U.S. 469, 480-81 (1986).  
Although the defendants claim that, as a matter of law, the City Manager, not Bard, had final 
policymaking authority over Hussey’s discipline, the municipal charter provisions they cite in 
support of that argument reference only appointments and removals.  [See Dkt. 10 at 11-12].  
They say nothing of disciplinary decisions—and Hussey’s complaint challenges a suspension, 

not a termination—and the defendants do not point to any other City official who does have the 
final say in police officer discipline.  See Welch, 542 F.3d at 942 (“We are bound by Pembaur 
and conclude that a single decision by a final policymaker can result in municipal liability.”).  
The defendants’ arguments regarding final policymaking authority fall short, and the Court 
denies the defendants’ motion to dismiss the claim against the City.5     
C.  Qualified Immunity                                               
The defendants also argue that the claim against Bard in his individual capacity must be 
dismissed as he is entitled to qualified immunity.  [Dkt. 10 at 13-15].  Hussey responds that Bard 
is not entitled to qualified immunity because he has asserted a valid First Amendment claim 
against Bard, and his rights were clearly established at the time of the alleged violation.  [Dkt. 13 

at 17-19].  Qualified immunity provides that “government officials performing discretionary 
functions” are generally “shielded from liability for civil damages insofar as their conduct does not 
violate clearly established statutory or constitutional rights of which a reasonable person would have 
known.”  Floyd v. Farrell, 765 F.2d 1, 4 (1st Cir. 1985) (citing Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800, 
818 (1982)).  Qualified immunity applies to claims against government officials in their individual 
capacities, and not to official capacity claims.6  Febus-Rodriguez v. Betancourt-Lebron, 14 F.3d 87, 

5 Because the Court has denied the defendants’ request to dismiss Hussey’s claim against the City, it will 
not dismiss the official capacity claim against Bard.  [See Dkt. 10 at 12]. 
6 The Court notes that the official capacity claim against Bard “in essence, is simply a claim against the 
[m]unicipality,” as “an official capacity suit is, in reality, a suit against the governmental entity, [and] not 
against the governmental actor.”  Febus-Rodriguez v. Betancourt-Lebron, 14 F.3d 87, 91 n.3 (1st Cir. 
1994) (citations omitted).                                                
91 n.3 (1st Cir. 1994) (citations omitted).  The Court must decide “(1) whether the facts alleged or 
shown by the plaintiff make out a violation of a constitutional right; and (2) if so, whether the right 
was ‘clearly established’ at the time of the defendant’s alleged violation.”  Maldonado v. Fontanes, 
568 F.3d 263, 269 (1st Cir. 2009) (citing Pearson v. Callahan, 555 U.S. 223, 232, 236 (2009)).  To 
answer the second question, the Court must evaluate whether, “in the specific context of the case,” 
Decotiis, 635 F.3d at 36, the law was “sufficiently clear” such that “every reasonable official would 
understand that what he is doing is unlawful,” Eves v. LePage, 927 F.3d 575, 583 (1st Cir. 2019) 

(citation and internal quotation marks omitted).  In other words, immunity “exists even where the 
abstract ‘right’ invoked by the plaintiff is well-established, so long as the official could reasonably 
have believed ‘on the facts’ that no violation existed.”  Dirrane v. Brookline Police Dep’t, 315 F.3d 
65, 69 (1st Cir. 2002) (citations omitted).  Courts need not follow the two-step analysis sequentially.  
Maldonado, 568 F.3d at 270.                                               
“The Supreme Court has ‘repeatedly told courts’ not to define the qualified immunity inquiry 
‘at a high level of generality,’” Eves, 927 at 583 (citing City & Cty. of S.F. v. Sheehan, 575 U.S. 600, 
613 (2015), and the First Circuit has observed that “[b]ecause Pickering’s constitutional rule turns 
upon a fact-intensive balancing test, it can rarely be considered ‘clearly established’ for purposes of 
qualified immunity,” Fabiano v. Hopkins, 352 F.3d 447, 457 (1st Cir. 2003) (citation omitted).  
Though the Court has concluded that Hussey stated a plausible claim to relief such that it survives the 
defendants’ motion to dismiss, the Court’s discussion of whether Hussey was engaged in protected 
speech, and therefore whether Bard violated his First Amendment right, illustrates that the “state of 
the law at the time of the alleged constitutional violation was not clear enough in the circuits 
generally, and in this circuit particularly, to put [Bard] on fair notice that [his] actions constituted a 
constitutional deprivation.”  Decotiis, 635 F.3d at 38.  A reasonable person in Bard’s position could 
have believed that he was not violating Hussey’s rights by suspending him for his Facebook post.  
See id.  Bard is entitled to qualified immunity here.  As such, the Court grants the defendants’ motion 
to dismiss as to Bard in his individual capacity, though the official capacity claim against Bard 
survives dismissal.                                                       
IV.  Conclusion                                                           
For the foregoing reasons, the defendants’ motion to dismiss [Dkt. 9] is GRANTED IN 
PART and DENIED IN PART.  The claim against Bard in his individual capacity is 

DISMISSED.  Hussey’s claim against the City of Cambridge remains, as does his claim against 
Bard in his official capacity.                                            
SO ORDERED.                                                          
Dated: October 11, 2022                 /s/ Angel Kelley                   
                                   Hon. Angel Kelley                 
                                   United States District Judge