UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                                              
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                                             



IN RE:                                     22-CV-9783 (RA)               

305 EAST 61st STREET GROUP LLC,            MEMORANDUM                    
                                          OPINION & ORDER                



RONNIE ABRAMS, United States District Judge:                              
    Appellant Little Hearts Marks Family II, LLP (“Little Hearts”)—an equity member of 305 
East 61st Street Group LLC (“Debtor”), which is currently engaged in Chapter 11 bankruptcy 
proceedings—filed this appeal challenging the Bankruptcy Court’s dismissal of a Complaint filed 
in New York state court (and subsequently removed to the Bankruptcy Court) stating causes of 
action against Appellees Jason D. Carter and 61 Prime LLC.1  Specifically, the Bankruptcy Court 
dismissed the Complaint after finding that Appellant lacked standing to bring the causes of action.  
See In re: 305 East 61st Street Group LLC, 644 B.R. 75 (Bankr. S.D.N.Y. 2022).  For the reasons 
set forth below, because the Bankruptcy Court correctly found that the causes of action pleaded in 
the Complaint were derivative claims—that is, claims which seek “to recover for injury to the 
business entity” generally, rather than for “redress for injury to [Appellant] individually,” Yudell 
v. Gilbert, 99 A.D.3d 108, 113 (N.Y. App. Div. 2012)—Appellant lacks standing to pursue them 
given the Debtor’s ongoing bankruptcy. The order of the Bankruptcy Court dismissing the 
Complaint is therefore affirmed.                                          

1    By a separate Memorandum Opinion and Order issued today, the Court separately affirmed the Bankruptcy 
Court’s approval of a settlement agreement pursuant to Bankruptcy Rule 9019 regarding the Debtor’s remaining 
assets.  See In re: 305 East 61st Street Group LLC, No. 23-cv-80.         
                         BACKGROUND                                      
    The Debtor in the underlying bankruptcy proceedings, 305 East 61st Street Group LLC, 
owned a ten-story former warehouse building in Manhattan which was acquired for conversion 
into a condominium.2  The Debtor, in turn, was owned by four members: (1) 61 Prime LLC 
(“Prime”); (2) Little Hearts; (3) Thaddeus Pollock; and (4) Onestone 305 LLC (“Onestone”).  

Prime, whose sole member and manager is Jason Carter, held a 50% ownership interest in the 
Debtor.  Little Hearts, whose principal is Mitchell Marks, held a 30% ownership interest in the 
Debtor and also served as its manager.  Pollock and Onestone each held a 10% ownership interest.   
    The members executed an Operating Agreement which assigned to each member specific 
floors of the building, and required each member to assume responsibility for payment of a portion 
of the mortgage on the building as part of their capital contributions to the conversion project.  
Compl. ¶ 22.  Under those terms, Prime was required to pay 5/8ths of the mortgage, and each of 
Little Hearts, Pollack, and Onestone were required to pay 1/8th of the mortgage.  Id. ¶ 23.  The 
Operating Agreement also assigned a percentage of membership in the Debtor to each member in 

exchange for their investment, and provided that each member would have the right to acquire and 
retain, use, occupy, and develop one or more floors of the building, roughly equal to one floor for 
each ten percent of equity.  Id. ¶ 28.  Prime therefore acquired exclusive rights to the 4th, 5th, 6th, 
7th, and 9th floors, id. ¶ 30; Little Hearts acquired exclusive rights to the “basement/cellar” and 
1st floor, 2nd floor, 10th floor, and roof, id. ¶ 29; Pollock acquired exclusive rights to the 3rd floor, 
id. ¶ 31; and Onestone acquired exclusive rights to the 8th floor, id. ¶ 32.  The Operating 


2    These facts are taken from the Complaint filed by Appellant in New York State court and subsequently 
removed to the Bankruptcy Court, see Little Hearts Marks Family II L.P. v. Jason D. Carter and 61 Prime LLC, Index 
No. 652410/2021, and, because this appeal arises from a decision on a motion to dismiss, the allegations contained 
therein are assumed to be true, see In re ICP Strategic Credit Income Fund Ltd., 568 B.R. 596, 605–06 & n.6 (S.D.N.Y. 
2017).                                                                    
Agreement further set forth a priority for the distribution of proceeds in the event that a unit in the 
building was sold.  See Operating Agreement § 21.2.  Under those terms, any profits that the 
members recognized from the sale of a unit would go first to the Debtor generally, and—only after 
a member’s obligations to the Debtor were fully paid—then to a member on an individual basis.   
    The members have a particularly litigious history.  See, e.g., In re 305 East 61st St. Grp. 

LLC, 644 B.R. 75, 78–80 (Bankr. S.D.N.Y. 2022) (detailing the years-long legal battle between 
the equity members for control of the Debtor).  To briefly summarize: first, while under the 
management of Little Hearts, the Debtor brought an action against Prime in New York State court 
in spring 2018, alleging that Prime had refused to pay $62,500 of its original subscription to the 
Debtor.  Compl. ¶ 39 (citing 305 East 61st Street Group LLC v. 61 Prime LLC, Index No. 
652934/2018).  In July 2018, Prime and its principal, Carter, brought a separate action in New 
York State court (hereafter, the “Prime Action”) against Little Hearts and its principal, Marks, 
alleging that they had violated the Operating Agreement by, among other things, misappropriating 
a portion of construction loan proceeds and misappropriating the unexcavated land below Debtor’s 

building.  Id. ¶¶ 41–42 (citing 61 Prime LLC, et al. v. Little Hearts Marks Family II, LP, et al., 
Index No. 653281/2018).  The court in the Prime Action issued a temporary restraining order 
removing Little Hearts as manager of the Debtor and substituting Prime in its place.  Id. ¶ 44.  
Little Hearts and Marks thereafter brought an action in August 2018 in New York State court (the 
“Little Hearts Action”) alleging that Prime and Carter had improperly removed it as manager, and 
that Prime and Carter had mismanaged the property, purportedly causing violations to be issued 
by the Department of Buildings of the City of New York.  See Little Hearts Marks Family II, LP 
v. 61 Prime LLC, et al., Index No. 654198/2018; see also Compl. ¶ 64.     
    In June 2019, the fraught history of the Debtor reached a breaking point, and it filed a 
petition for relief under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code.  Bankr. Dkt. 1.  Upon the filing of the 
petition, both the Prime Action and the Little Hearts Action were automatically stayed, as required 
by 11 U.S.C. § 362.  In view of the equity members’ litigious history and rivaling interests 
regarding the Debtor’s remaining assets, the Bankruptcy Court eventually appointed Kenneth P. 
Silverman as the Chapter 11 Trustee to administer the Debtor’s bankruptcy estate.  See Bankr. Dkt. 

79 at 3 (Memorandum Decision recounting that appointment of a neutral third party as trustee was 
necessary because “the equity members could not agree on a path forward for the Debtor”).  The 
Chapter 11 Trustee later filed a plan of liquidation (the “Plan”), which was confirmed by an order 
of the Bankruptcy Court, and which established a trust (the “Creditor Trust”) into which all of the 
Debtor’s remaining assets—including causes of action held by the Debtor—were transferred.  
Silverman, already the Chapter 11 Trustee, also assumed the role of Creditor Trustee.   
    Following the automatic stay of the Little Hearts Action against Prime and Carter, Little 
Hearts then brought an adversary proceeding in the Bankruptcy Court against the Debtor seeking 
a declaratory judgment and injunctive relief, as well as claims asserting breach of contract and 

breach of implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing.  In August 2019, Little Hearts also filed 
a proof of claim against the Debtor in its Chapter 11 proceedings in the amount of $12 million.  
The proof of claim included language directly tying Little Hearts’ claims against the Debtor to its 
existing claims against Prime and Carter:                                 
    [I]f it is determined that Prime and Mr. Carter are not individually liable to Claimant 
    for their actions or inactions, the Claimant asserts claims against the Debtor for 
    monetary damages arising from the Debtor’s breaches of the Operating Agreement 
    by, inter alia, failing to timely complete the Project (defined below), pay off its 
    mortgages, and secure approval of a condominium offering plan, as expressly 
    contemplated  by  the  Operating  Agreement;  causing  or  permitting  damage  to 
    Claimant’s condominium units and other portions of the Building (defined below); 
    and other losses suffered by the Claimant.                           

Bankr. Rec. 245–56, Proof of Claim at ¶ 4.  In October 2019, Little Hearts then moved for the stay 
in the Little Hearts Action to be lifted.  See Bankr. Dkt. 66.  Notably, in that motion, Little Hearts 
acknowledged that its claims against Prime and Carter were effectively the same claims that it had 
also asserted against the Debtor’s estate:                                
    [Little Hearts] intends to assert claims . . . against Prime and Mr. Carter arising 
    from their actions in failing to complete the Project, failing to obtain approval of 
    the condominium offering, and permitting the Mortgage to mature without being 
    timely refinanced or paid off.  If the State Court rules in the Marks Parties’ favor 
    on the claims or counterclaims, then Prime and Carter (and not the Debtor) will be 
    liable for Marks LP’s damages.  If, on the other hand, the State Court determines 
    that Prime and Mr. Carter acted properly, then Marks LP’s claims against the 
    Debtor . . . would continue to exist.                                

Bankr. Dkt. 66, Mot. to Lift Stay at ¶¶ 27–28.                            
    Of particular relevance for purposes of the present appeal: in April 2021, Little Hearts filed 
a new complaint (the “Complaint”) in New York State court, bringing causes of action against 
Prime and Carter, Appellees here.  See Little Hearts Marks Family II L.P. v. Jason D. Carter and 
61 Prime LLC, Index No. 652410/2021.  Appellees filed a notice of removal to the Bankruptcy 
Court in May 2021, and subsequently moved to dismiss the Complaint.  In their motion to dismiss, 
Appellees argued that Little Hearts was enjoined from pursuing its causes of action because they 
belonged solely to the Creditor Trust pursuant to the Plan approved by the Bankruptcy Court.  See 
Mot. at ¶ 27.  More specifically, Appellees argued that Little Hearts’ claims were each ultimately 
grounded in mismanagement of the Debtor, making them derivative claims to an entity involved 
in a bankruptcy proceeding.  Id. ¶ 7.  Appellees further argued that the harm allegedly suffered by 
Little Hearts in the Complaint would be the same harm purportedly suffered by the Debtor and 
other members.  Id. ¶ 39.                                                 
    In  October 2022, after  oral argument,  the Bankruptcy Court issued a Memorandum 
Decision and Order granting Appellees’ motion to dismiss the Complaint.  See In re 305 East 61st 
Street Grp. LLC, 644 B.R. 75 (Bankr. S.D.N.Y. 2022).  The Court held that Little Hearts lacked 
standing to pursue each cause of action in the Complaint against Appellees, given that the 
fundamental allegation underlying each claim entailed the alleged mismanagement of the Debtor.  
Id. at 86–93.  The Bankruptcy Court further found that the effects of Appellees’ alleged wrongful 
conduct impacted the Debtor and/or all members’ rights, rather than Little Hearts independently.  
Id.    It  concluded  that  “the  damages  asserted  in  the  Complaint  flow[ed]  directly  from  the 

Defendants’ actions upon the Company’s operations and [were] experience[d] by all members with 
respect to their designated units.”  Id. at 89.  The Bankruptcy Court thus held that Little Hearts 
lacked standing to  assert the claims in  the Complaint,  which were instead properly vested 
exclusively with the Creditor Trust.  Id. at 87, 93.  Accordingly, the Bankruptcy Court dismissed 
the Complaint in its entirety.  Appellant timely appealed, and oral argument was held on August 
1, 2023.                                                                  
                        LEGAL STANDARD                                   
    A district court reviews a bankruptcy court’s findings of fact for clear error and any 
conclusions of law de novo.  See In re Momentum Mfg. Corp., 25 F.3d 1132, 1136 (2d Cir. 1994).  

Specifically, challenges to a bankruptcy court’s rulings on a motion to dismiss are reviewed de 
novo.  See In re Lyondell Chem. Co., 554 B.R. 635, 644 (S.D.N.Y. 2016).  “[S]tanding is the 
threshold question in every federal case, determining the power of the court to entertain the suit.”  
In re Gucci, 126 F.3d 380, 387–88 (2d Cir. 1997).  “If a court perceives at any stage of the 
proceedings that it lacks subject matter jurisdiction, then it must take proper notice of the defect 
by dismissing the action.”  Cave v. E. Meadow Union Free Sch. Dist., 514 F.3d 240, 250 (2d Cir. 
2008).                                                                    
                          DISCUSSION                                     
    The commencement of a bankruptcy case creates an estate which includes “all legal or 
equitable interests of the debtor in property as of the commencement of the case.”  11 U.S.C. § 
541(a)(1).  As such, a debtor’s causes of action vest with the bankruptcy estate at the time that its 
petition for relief is filed, and the representative of the bankruptcy estate has exclusive standing to 
assert causes of action on behalf of the estate.  See BRS Assocs., LP v. Dansker, 246 B.R. 755, 
771–72 (S.D.N.Y. 2000); see also In re Granite Partners, LP, 194 B.R. 318, 323 (Bankr. S.D.N.Y. 

1996) (“The trustee stands in the shoes of the debtor,” and “may bring any suit that the debtor 
could have brought before bankruptcy.”).  As the Second Circuit has observed, the “general 
bankruptcy policy of ensuring that all similarly-situated creditors are treated fairly” requires that 
the trustee have the first opportunity to pursue estate actions without interference from individual 
creditors.  St Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co. v. PepsiCo, Inc., 884 F.2d 688, 697 (2d Cir. 1989).  
“Where the trustee has standing to sue, the automatic stay prevents creditors or shareholders from 
asserting the claim notwithstanding that, outside of bankruptcy, they have the right to do so.”  In 
re Granite Partners, LP, 194 B.R. at 325.  Accordingly, individual creditors or shareholders lack 
standing to bring so-called ‘derivative’ actions—those which are derivative of a claim that may be 

brought on behalf of the estate.  See id. at 324.  Conversely, where a cause of action is a “personal, 
direct claim[] of [a] creditor[],” the trustee lacks standing to assert the claim.  Id.  And, as stated 
previously, where a plaintiff lacks standing, a court does not have subject matter jurisdiction to 
hear the case.  See Cent. States Se. & Sw. Areas Health & Welfare Fund v. Merck-Medco Managed 
Care, LLC, 433 F.3d 181, 198 (2d Cir. 2005).                              
    Whether an action is direct or derivative is a question of state law.  See St. Paul Fire & 
Marine Ins. Co., 884 F.2d 688, 700 (2d Cir. 1989) (“Whether the rights belong to the debtor or the 
individual creditors is a question of state law.”).  In New York, a “plaintiff asserting a derivative 
claim seeks to recover for injury to the business entity;” whereas a “plaintiff asserting a direct 
claim seeks redress for injury to him or herself individually.”  Yudell v. Gilbert, 99 A.D.3d at 113.  
A shareholder or creditor has no individual cause of action for an alleged wrong against the 
business entity, even if he or she suffers injury because of that wrong and “may ultimately share 
in the recovery.” Serino v. Lipper, 123 A.D.3d 34, 39 (N.Y. App. Div. 2014); see also Tooley v. 
Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, Inc., 845 A.2d 1031, 1036 (Del. 2004) (a key consideration is 

“whether the stockholder has demonstrated that he or she has suffered an injury that is not 
dependent on an injury to the corporation”); Yudell, 99 A.D.3d at 114 (adopting the test developed 
by the Delaware Supreme Court in Tooley).                                 
    Thus, in evaluating whether a claim is direct or derivative, New York courts consider “(1) 
who suffered the alleged harm (the corporation or the suing stockholders, individually); and (2) 
who  would  receive  the  benefit  of  any  recovery  or  other  remedy  (the  corporation  or  the 
stockholders, individually).”  Serino, 123 A.D.3d at 40.  A creditor has a direct cause of action 
where it alleges that the defendant breached a duty owed to the plaintiff independent of the duties 
owed to the entity in bankruptcy.  See Venizelos v. Oceania Maritime Agency, Inc., 268 A.D.2d 

291, 291 (N.Y. App. Div. 2000).                                           
 I.   The Causes of Action Stated in the Complaint are Derivative        
    The Bankruptcy Court did not err in finding that each cause of action asserted in the 
Complaint was derivative, and that Appellant thus lacked standing to pursue them.   
    First, for the breach of fiduciary duty cause of action, as the Bankruptcy Court correctly 
observed, the Complaint is replete with references that make clear that the alleged harms were 
experienced by the members generally rather than Little Hearts exclusively.  See In re 305 East 
61st Street Group LLC, 644 B.R. at 86–87.  The Complaint variously alleges, for instance, that 
Carter and Prime “Plac[ed] the Company into a Bankruptcy Proceeding,” “Allow[ed] the Mortgage 
to mature so that Members would be responsible for paying interest at the 24% default rate without 
calling on the Members to pay the debt,” and that “Carter and Prime refused to accept the funds 
Members were required to pay the Mortgage pursuant to their Subscription Agreements with the 
Company.”  Compl. ¶ 88 (emphasis added).  Contrary to Appellant’s argument, the Complaint’s 
allegations do not spell out how or why Carter and Prime owed any independent fiduciary duty 

solely to Little Hearts, rather than to the members of the Debtor more broadly.  Nor does 
Appellant’s reliance on Newman v. Newman, 202 A.D.3d 442 (N.Y. App. Div. 2022), require a 
different result.  In that case, the court held that a claim for an independent breach of fiduciary 
duty to the plaintiff existed because of the parties’ status as family members, such that the fiduciary 
duty at issue could not be inextricably embedded in the derivative claims stated in the complaint.  
Id. at 443–44.  Appellant here alleges no such theory for any similar independent breach of 
fiduciary duty owed to Little Hearts.                                     
    The second cause of action, for aiding and abetting the breach of fiduciary duty, fares 
similarly.  The Complaint sets forth the same factual allegations underlying the fiduciary duty 

cause of action, see Compl. ¶¶ 94, 96–97, and the Bankruptcy Court correctly concluded that, like 
the first cause of action, the allegations are “anchored in [Appellees’] alleged wrongful conduct as 
to the Company, with effects that impacted all Members’ rights,” 644 B.R. at 87.  Appellant cites 
MDK Hijos Trust v. Nordlicht, 2020 N.Y. Misc. LEXIS 1248, at *48–49 (Sup. Ct. March 10, 
2020), for the proposition that its cause of action for aiding and abetting the breach of fiduciary 
duty should necessarily be construed as a direct claim.  But that is not so.  In MDK Hijos Trust, 
the court held merely that the complaint pleaded particularized facts giving rise to independent 
fiduciary duties that the defendant owed to the plaintiff.  See id. at *15; see also id. at *16–17 
(outlining the independent fiduciary duties owed).  Here, however, the Complaint contains no 
allegation that any independent fiduciary duty was owed by Carter and Prime to Little Hearts 
specifically, rather than to the members of the Debtor generally.         
    The third and fourth causes of action, for breach of contract and violation of the covenant 
of good faith and fair dealing, also belong to the Debtor (via the Creditor Trust) and are thus too 
derivative.  In alleging breach of contract, the Complaint alleges that Carter through “ownership, 

domination  and  control”  caused  “Prime,  a  Member  and  Manager  to  breach  the  Operating 
Agreement.”  Compl. ¶ 105.  Appellant argues that paragraphs 9(I) and 9(F) of the Agreement 
form the basis of this cause of action, but each of those provisions relate to the Manager’s duties 
to the Debtor and all members generally.  Paragraph 9(I) provides that the Manger is required to:  
    discharge the Manager’s duties to the Company and to the other Members in good 
    faith  and  with  the  degree  of  care  that  an  ordinarily  prudent  person  and  an 
    experienced real estate developer in a similar position would use under similar 
    circumstances.                                                       

Operating Agreement at ¶ 9(I) (emphasis added).  In like form, Paragraph 9(F) provides that the 
Manager is “required to devote as much time as is reasonably necessary to the management of the 
Company’s business . . . to perform all work . . . as herein contemplated and provided.”  Id. ¶ 9(F) 
(emphasis added).  Accepting the allegations in the Complaint as true—including that those 
contractual provisions unequivocally breached by Carter and Prime—such breach would, as the 
Bankruptcy Court held, involve “wrongful conduct as to the Company, with effects that impacted 
all Members’ rights.”  644 B.R. at 87.  The fourth cause of action, for violation of the covenant of 
good faith and fair dealing, similarly alleges that Appellees “violated their obligations to act in 
good faith and fair dealing required as Managers by acting in their personal interests, self-dealing 
and acting against the Company and other Members.”  Compl. ¶ 113 (emphasis added).  The 
Complaint thus alleges that any violation of the covenant and fair dealing caused harm to the 
Debtor and its members generally, and it is also a textbook derivative claim.  In re Granite 
Partners, LP, 194 B.R. at 324.                                            
    The remaining claims were also appropriately held to be derivative by the Bankruptcy 
Court, and Appellant lacks standing to bring them as well.  Count five purports to assert a cause 
of action against Carter individually on the theory that he is the alleged alter ego of Prime and the 
eventual purchaser of the building at 305 East 61st Street, Lazarus 5.  See Compl. ¶¶ 117–27.  But 

“there is no independent cause of action for alter-ego liability,” which is instead a “veil piercing 
claim” meant solely to “impos[e] liability on an underlying cause of action.”  Ocampo v. 455 
Hospitality LLC, 2021 WL 4267388, at *10 (S.D.N.Y. Sept. 20, 2021) (citing Peacock v. Thomas, 
516 U.S. 349, 354 (1996)).  Because the wrongs underpinning any alter ego liability against Carter 
are the same as those alleged against Appellees in the other causes of action, they do not plead any 
direct, individualized harm to Little Hearts.  See Compl. ¶ 121 (“Carter abused the privilege of 
doing business in the corporate form to perpetrate wrongs against Plaintiff and others.”).  So too, 
count six, for unjust enrichment, merely repeats each of the preceding allegations in the Complaint 
to assert that Appellees engaged in inequitable conduct causing harm to the Debtor members 

generally, and that they were unjustly enriched as a result.  See Compl. ¶¶ 128, 130–31.  Nor does 
Appellant’s reliance on Scott v. Pro Mgt. Servs. Grp., 2 N.Y.S.3d 90 (App. Div. 2015), salvage its 
argument.  In Scott, while the court did hold that an unjust enrichment claim was direct, it did so 
expressly because “all other owners of the holding companies received revenues, licensing fees, 
royalties, and other consideration for using the companies’ trademarks, to plaintiff’s exclusion.”  
Id. at 91.  Here, Appellees’ alleged mismanagement of the Debtor resulted in harm to all equity 
members—not only Little Hearts, but also Onestone and Pollock.            
    But even assuming, arguendo, that any of these six causes of action were nominally pled 
as direct claims, any harm to Little Hearts would be so “confused with or embedded in” a harm to 
the Debtor and all its members that it cannot be maintained as a direct claim under New York law.  
Serino, 123 A.D.3d at 40.  The New York Court of Appeals has long held that where a complaint’s 
allegations “confuse a shareholder’s derivative and individual rights,” it should “be dismissed.”  
Abrams v. Donati, 66 N.Y.2d 951, 953 (1985); see also Maldonado v. DiBre, 35 N.Y.S.3d 731, 
735 (App. Div. 2016) (finding, where an “individual claim is ‘confused’ or ‘embedded’ within [a] 

derivative claim, then it must be dismissed”); Serino, 123 A.D.3d at 40 (“[E]ven where an 
individual harm is claimed, if it is confused with or embedded in the harm to the corporation, it 
cannot separately stand.”).  To be sure, as Appellant argued in its briefs—and emphasized again 
at oral argument—direct claims can, in certain instances, be asserted based on contractual rights 
bestowed upon members of an LLC.  See, e.g., Opening Br. at 12–13; Tr., Oral Arg. August 1, 
2023, at 40:11–23 (citing Weiner v. King, 43 Misc. 3d 1203(A) (N.Y. Sup. Ct., N.Y. Cty. 2014) 
and Ruffalo v. Transtech Serv. Partners Inc., 2010 WL 3307487, at *9 (Del. Ch. 2010) (“Claims 
based upon contractual rights of the shareholder which exist separately from any right of the 
corporation are direct claims.”)).  But where an otherwise independent claim is “inextricably 

entangled with derivative claims,” it should be dismissed as derivative.  Accredited Aides Plus, 
Inc. v. Program Risk Mgmt., Inc., 46 N.Y.S.3d 246, 258 (App. Div. 2017).   
    That is the case here.  Because any injuries to Little Hearts as pleaded in the Complaint are 
based on allegations of Appellees’ mismanagement of the Debtor, and thereby caused harm to all 
members, any damages suffered were suffered by all members in accordance with their respective 
membership interest.  See In re 305 East 61st Street Group LLC, 644 B.R. at 92–93 (Bankruptcy 
Court finding same); see also Serino, 123 A.D.3d at 39–40 (observing that a “claim must be 
factually supportable by more than complaints that conflict [a claimant’s] derivative and individual 
rights”); Yudell, 949 N.Y.S.2d at 384 (“To the extent, if any, that plaintiffs have asserted direct 
claims,  they  are  embedded  in  an  otherwise  derivative  claim  for  partnership  waste  and 
mismanagement.”).                                                         
    In sum: because the Bankruptcy Court did not err in finding the causes of action derivative, 
Appellant lacks standing, and its underlying Complaint was thus appropriately dismissed for lack 
of jurisdiction.                                                          

 II.  Appellant Waived the Argument that it was Conferred Real Property Rights 
    On appeal to this Court, Appellant argues in the alternative—and for the very first time—
that the Operating Agreement also granted it “rights to real property, and not personal property as 
is a membership interest in an LLC or a share in a corporation.”  Opening Br. at 13.  The argument 
is premised on the notion that the exclusive rights each member was granted to designated floors 
in the building at 305 East 61st somehow conveyed real property rights to each member’s 
respective floors, and that any cause of action stating a claim for interference with or violation of 
those real property rights is necessarily a direct, rather than derivative, cause of action.  See id. at 
13–15.  But Appellant did not raise this argument below to the Bankruptcy Court, nor does the 

Complaint contain any allegation that the Operating Agreement in any way conferred an interest 
in real property.  Therefore, as an initial matter, the argument has been waived.  As the Second 
Circuit has observed, although a court has “discretion to consider a waived argument where 
necessary to avoid manifest injustice, the circumstances normally do not militate in favor of an 
exercise of discretion to address … new arguments on appeal where those arguments were 
available to the [party] below and they proffer no reason for their failure to raise the argument 
below.”  In re Johns-Manville Corp., 759 F.3d 206, 219 (2d Cir. 2014).  Thus, “any argument not 
raised in the bankruptcy court is waived and will not be considered by the district court, unless 
such waiver would result in manifest injustice.”  In re Ampal-American Isr. Corp., 554 B.R. 604, 
617–18 (S.D.N.Y. 2016).                                                   
    There would be no manifest injustice by finding waiver of the argument here.  Indeed, 
Appellant’s argument to the Bankruptcy Court below—that the Complaint stated a direct cause of 
action based in contractual rights, rather than any real property right—appears to stand in stark 
contrast to the argument that it now raises on appeal.  See Bankr. Rec. 796, Sept. 9, 2021 Hearing 

Tr. at 64:3–6 (Appellant arguing: “in any event, these rights, they don’t have to be property rights.  
The rights were contractual in nature, which gave Little Hearts direct standing to protect those 
rights.”); id. at 780, Tr. at 48:4–7 (“[T]he complaint doesn’t seek the property back, Your Honor.  
What it seeks are money damages related to the rights, the contractual rights that Little Hearts lost 
because of what is alleged that the defendants did.”); id. at 774, Tr. at 42:3–6 (“Little Hearts’ 
claims are based on contractual rights that only it has under the operating agreement.”).  And, 
given the particularly litigious history between Appellant and Appellees, with more than a half-
dozen separately filed actions related to the same underlying claims of mismanagement of the 
Debtor across multiple fora, it can hardly be said that the real property argument was not “available 

to the [Appellant] below.”  In re Johns-Manville Corp., 759 F.3d at 219.  
    Finally, even were the argument not waived, it would nonetheless fail, as the plain terms 
of the Operating Agreement did not convey real property rights to the members.  Rather, the 
designation of specific units for limited purposes based upon a member’s capital contribution 
reflected a membership interest in the Debtor.  See Operating Agreement § 5 (“The respective 
percentage interest of the Members (the ‘Percentage Interests’) of the Company shall be as set 
forth in Exhibit ‘A.’); id. § 4(f)(i) (providing Little Hearts a “20% Percentage Interest in the 
Company, together with the right to retain, use, occupy, develop and acquire the condominium 
units” on its designated floors).  Indeed, the Operating Agreement specifically sets out a priority 
for the distribution of proceeds in the event that a condominium unit in the building were to be 
sold.  Id. 421.2.  That is, any profits recognized from the sale of any units were to go first to the 
Debtor generally and then—only after  a member’s obligations to the Debtor were fully repaid— 
could any member recover individually.  Jd.  Were the Operating Agreement to have conveyed 
real property rights to designated floors, as Appellant now appears to argue, any sale proceeds 
would have flowed directly to the owning member.  The fact that it did not underscores that the 
rights were instead contractual in nature, and tied to each member’s interest in the Debtor as a 
matter of “pure equity ownership.”  In re 305 61st Street Group LLC, 644 B.R. at 92.  And, as 
stated previously, any violation of a right held as  a member in the Debtor generally is definitionally 
derivative.  See Serino, 123 A.D.3d at 39 (observing that  a member has no direct cause of action 
for an alleged wrong against the business entity, even if he or she suffers injury because of that 
wrong and “may ultimately share in the recovery’). 
                               CONCLUSION 
     Accordingly, for the foregoing reasons, the decision of the Bankruptcy Court is affirmed. 
The Clerk of Court is respectfully directed to close this action. 

SO ORDERED. 
Dated:       August 11, 2023
            New York, New York                 | J 
                                             —__. 
                                        Hon. Ronnie Abrams 
                                        United States District Judge 

                                     15