UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                                              
EASTERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                                              
------------------------------------------------x                         
MONIKA KAPOOR,                                                            

          Petitioner,         MEMORANDUM AND ORDER                   
                              Case No. 16-CV-5834 (FB)               
-against-                                                            

VINCENT F. DEMARCO, United States                                         
Marshal for the Eastern District of                                       
New York, and ROBERTO CORDEIRO,                                           
Chief Pretrial Services Officer for the                                   
Eastern District of New York,                                             

          Respondents.                                               
------------------------------------------------x                         

Appearances:                                                              
For the Petitioner:                For the Respondents:                   
AMY NUSSBAUM GELL                  MEREDITH A. ARFA                       
Gell & Gell                        Assistant United States Attorney       
299 Broadway, Suite 620            Eastern District of New York           
New York, New York 10007           271 Cadman Plaza East                  
                              Brooklyn, New York 11201               

BLOCK, Senior District Judge:                                             
On March 26, 2025, the Second Circuit affirmed the denial of Monika  
Kapoor’s petition for a writ of habeas corpus, agreeing with the Court that it lacks 
jurisdiction to review the Secretary of State’s determination that Kapoor’s 
extradition to India would not violate the Convention Against Torture (“CAT”).   
See Kapoor v. DeMarco, 132 F.4th 595, 614 (2d Cir. 2025).    Mandate issued on 
May 30, 2025.                                                             
The government now asks the Court to order Kapoor’s detention pending her 
surrender to Indian authorities.    Its request should have been made in the 

underlying extradition proceeding, in which Magistrate Judge Levy ordered 
Kapoor’s detention but granted bail.    However, its error is purely formal; any 
decision by Magistrate Judge Levy on the government’s request would no doubt 

lead to de novo review by the Court.    See United States v. Al-Nouri, 983 F.3d 
1096, 1098 (9th Cir. 2020) (“To the extent a magistrate judge has been assigned 
the Article III power to make bail decisions [in extradition proceedings], either 
implicitly by custom or expressly by local rules, such decisions may be reviewed 

de novo by the district court upon application by a party.”).    To avoid further 
prolonging these already protracted proceedings, the Court will address the 
request.                                                                  

After issuing a certificate of extraditability, Magistrate Judge Levy 
continued Kapoor’s bail to allow her “to petition for relief in another forum, for 
example before Judge Block, where she intends to renew a habeas petition, or the 
Second Circuit.”    United States v. Kapoor, Case No. 11-MJ-456-RML (E.D.N.Y. 

Minute Entry of Sept. 24, 2016).    Both this Court and the Second Circuit have 
now denied relief.                                                        
Kapoor notes that she has petitioned the Supreme Court to review the 

Second Circuit’s decision.    She asks, in effect, for a stay pending resolution of 
that petition.    Such a stay “is an intrusion into the ordinary processes of 
administration and judicial review, and accordingly is not a matter of right, even if 

irreparable injury might otherwise result to the appellant.”    Nken v. Holder, 556 
U.S. 418, 427 (2009) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).    Thus, in 
addition to showing irreparable harm, Kapoor “must make a strong showing that 

[she] is likely to succeed on the merits.”    Trump v. CASA, Inc., ____ S. Ct. ____, 
2025 WL 1773631, at *6 (quoting Nken, 556 U.S. at 434).                   
Three circuit courts have concluded that district courts have no habeas 
jurisdiction to review CAT claims by extraditees.    See Kapoor, 132 F.4th at 609 

(citing Omar, 646 F.3d 13, 18 (D.C. Cir. 2011), and Mironescu v. Costner, 480 
F.3d 664, 676 (4th Cir. 2007)).    The Ninth Circuit has held that “a district court 
may do no more than confirm that the Secretary of State had actually considered 

the extraditee's CAT claim and found it was not ‘more likely than not’ that the 
extraditee will face torture if extradited.”    Id. (citing Trinidad y Garcia v. 
Thomas, 683 F.3d 952, 957 (9th Cir. 2012) (en banc).    Since the Court, in an 
abundance of caution, “ensured that the [State Department] made the requisite 

determination,” Kapoor v. Demarco, 2022 WL 4357498, at *3 (E.D.N.Y. Sept. 20, 
2022) (citing Trinidad y Garcia), there is no likelihood, strong or otherwise, that 
the Supreme Court will grant Kapoor’s petition to resolve a circuit split as to the 

availability of habeas review in this context.                            
Kapoor further notes that she has raised a CAT claim in pending removal 
proceedings.    But those proceedings will determine whether Kapoor is removable 

under the immigration laws.    Regardless of their outcome, she is still extraditable 
under the United States’s treaty obligations.    As the Court has already explained, 
CAT claims by extraditees are resolved by the Department of State, see Kapoor, 

2022 WL 4357498, at *3; the Second Circuit’s decision confirms that those 
resolutions are final.                                                    
In sum, the Secretary of State has issued a warrant for Kapoor’s extradition 
to India.    Except for the remote chance of Supreme Court intervention, judicial 

review of her extraditability—and, therefore, the basis for her bail—is at an end.   
Accordingly, bail is revoked and the U.S. Marshals Service is ordered to take 
Kapoor into custody for purposes of extradition and surrender to the Republic of 

India.    Kapoor shall have until 9 a.m. on Monday, July 7, 2025, to self-surrender, 
after which this memorandum and order shall constitute a warrant for her arrest. 
SO ORDERED.                                                          


                              _/S/ Frederic Block___________         
                              FREDERIC BLOCK                         
                              Senior United States District Judge    
Brooklyn, New York                                                        
July 1, 2025

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                                              
EASTERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                                              
------------------------------------------------x                         
MONIKA KAPOOR,                                                            

          Petitioner,       MEMORANDUM AND ORDER                     
                            Case No. 16-CV-5834-FB                   
-against-                                                            

VINCENT F. DEMARCO, United States                                         
Marshal for the Eastern District of New                                   
York, and ROBERTO CORDEIRO,                                               
Chief Pretrial Services Officer for the                                   
Eastern District of New York,                                             

          Respondents.                                               
------------------------------------------------x                         

Appearances:                                                              
For the Petitioner:                For the Respondents:                   
AMY NUSSBAUM GELL                  MEREDITH A. ARFA                       
Gell & Gell                        Assistant United States Attorney       
299 Broadway, Suite 620            Eastern District of New York           
New York, New York 10007           271 Cadman Plaza East                  
                              Brooklyn, New York 11201               

BLOCK, Senior District Judge:                                             

The Secretary of State has ordered Monika Kapoor extradited to India to face 
criminal charges there.  In response, Kapoor filed a petition for a writ of habeas 
corpus pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2241.                                      
To bring the case up to date, the Court held oral argument on November 18, 
2021, and allowed the parties to file supplemental post-argument briefs.  Having 
considered all the parties’ written submissions, as well as their oral arguments, the 
Court denies the petition.                                                
                           I                                         

Kapoor is a native and citizen of India.  She entered the United States in 
approximately 1999 and overstayed her visa.  She was placed in removal    
proceedings in March 2010.  She applied for asylum, withholding of removal and 

relief under the United Nations Convention Against Torture (“CAT”).       
In April 2010, an Indian court issued a warrant for Kapoor’s arrest based on 
five violations of the Indian Penal Code.  In October 2010, the Indian government 
submitted a formal request for extradition to the United States.  In response, the 

United States government sought an arrest warrant and judicial certificate of 
extraditability.  As a result of the extradition proceedings, the removal 
proceedings were held in abeyance.                                        

Kapoor was arrested and released on bail.  Magistrate Judge Levy held an 
extradition hearing and, on April 17, 2012, certified that Kapoor was extraditable.  
He declined to revoke her bail.                                           
Kapoor then filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus challenging 

Magistrate Judge Levy’s certification.  The Court denied the petition.  See 
Kapoor v. Dunne, No. 12-CV-3196, 2014 WL 1803271 (E.D.N.Y. May 7, 2014).  
The Second Circuit affirmed.  See Kapoor v. Dunne, 606 F. App’x 11 (2d Cir. 

2015).                                                                    
Kapoor then asked the Department of State to deny extradition on the 
ground that she would face serious harm if returned to India.  On September 18, 

2015, then-Deputy Secretary of State Antony Blinken issued an extradition 
surrender warrant.                                                        
A letter sent to Kapoor a week later explained that the decision was made 

“[f]ollowing a review of all pertinent information, including the materials directly 
submitted to the Department of State.”  Resps.’ Mem. of Law, Ex. F.  It further 
noted that CAT obligated the United States “not to extradite a person to a country 
where there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be in danger of 

being subjected to torture” and that “this obligation involves consideration of 
whether a person facing extradition from the U.S. is more likely than not to be 
tortured in the State requesting extradition.”  Id. (internal quotation marks 

omitted).  It concluded by “confirm[ing] that the decision to surrender Monika 
Kapoor to India complies with the United States’ obligations under the Convention 
and its implementing statute and regulations.”  Id.                       
On October 7, 2015, Kapoor filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus 

challenging the Secretary of State’s extradition decision.  After the Secretary of 
State agreed to consider any new materials Kapoor wished to submit in support of 
her CAT claim, she withdrew the petition without prejudice to renewal if the 

Secretary did not deny extradition.                                       
On August 4, 2016, a letter from the Department of State advised Kapoor 
that it had “decided to reaffirm the prior authorization” of her extradition.  Pet., 

Ex. G.  It stated that the decision had been made “[f]ollowing a review of all 
pertinent information, including th[e] newly-provided materials,” and once again 
“confirmed that the decision to surrender Monika Kapoor to India complies with 

the United States’ obligations under the Convention [Against Torture] and its 
implementing statute and regulations.”  Id.                               
In response, Kapoor filed the present habeas petition.  Magistrate Levy 
continued her bail pending resolution of the petition.                    

                          II                                         
Kapoor’s central claim is that she will likely be tortured if returned to India, 
in violation of CAT.  While the United States is a signatory to that treaty, it is not 

self-executing.  Wang v. Ashcroft, 320 F.3d 130, 140 (2d Cir. 2003).  “Unless a 
treaty is self-executing . . . , it does not, in and of itself, create individual rights that 
can give rise to habeas relief.”  Id.  Rather, Kapoor must rely on rights 
“containing in [the treaty’s] implementing statutes and regulations.”  Yuen Jin v. 

Mukasey, 538 F.3d 143, 159 (2d Cir. 2008).                                
CAT was implemented by the Foreign Relations Authorization Act       
(“FRAA”), which declares that the United States will not “expel, extradite, or 

otherwise effect the involuntary return of any person to a country in which there 
are substantial grounds for believing the person would be in danger of being 
subjected to torture, regardless of whether the person is physically present in the 

United States.”  Pub. L. 105-277, § 2242(a), 112 Stat. 2681 (1998).  It then 
declares, however, that “nothing in this section shall be construed as providing any 
court jurisdiction to consider or review claims raised under the Convention or this 

section, or any other determination made with respect to the application of the 
policy set forth in subsection (a), except as part of the review of a final order of 
removal pursuant to section 242 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 
1252).”  Id. § 2242(d).                                                   

In Wang, the Second Circuit held that this statutory provision did not deprive 
federal courts of jurisdiction to address CAT claims in the context of a habeas 
corpus petition.  See 320 F.3d at 141.  Two years later, Congress passed the 

REAL ID Act, which provides that “a petition for review filed with an appropriate 
court of appeals . . . shall be the sole and exclusive means for judicial review of 
any cause or claim under the United Nations Convention Against Torture.”  8 
U.S.C. § 1252(a)(4).  The D.C. Circuit has held that “the REAL ID Act thus 

confirms that [a detainee] possesses no statutory right to judicial review of 
conditions in the receiving country.”  Omar v. McHugh, 646 F.3d 13, 18 (D.C. 
Cir. 2011).                                                               

Kapoor argues that Congress cannot constitutionally suspend the writ of 
habeas corpus.  It is true that the Constitution’s Suspension Clause protects access 
to the writ unless it is suspended “in cases of rebellion of invasion.”  However, the 

clause “protects the writ as it existed when the Constitution was drafted and 
ratified.”  Boumediene v. Bush, 553 U.S. 723, 746 (2008).  As Omar explains, the 
writ was not historically available to those facing extradition:  “Those facing 

extradition traditionally have not been able to maintain habeas claims to block 
transfer based on conditions in the receiving country.  Rather, applying what has 
been known as the rule of non-inquiry, courts historically have refused to inquire 
into conditions an extradited individual might face in the receiving country.”  646 

F.3d at 19 (citing Munaf v. Geren, 553 U.S. 674 (2008), and Neely v. Henkel, 180 
U.S. 109 (1901)).                                                         
It does not follow that Kapoor has no venue to raise her CAT claim. FRAA 

directs “the heads of the appropriate agencies [to] prescribe regulations to implement 
the obligations of the United States under [CAT.]”  Pub. L. 105-277, § 2242(b).  
The Secretary of State has done so in the context of extradition:         
(a)  In each case where allegations relating to torture are made or the 
     issue  is  otherwise  brought  to  the  Department’s  attention, 
     appropriate  policy  and  legal  offices  review  and  analyze  
     information relevant to the case in preparing a recommendation  
     to the Secretary as to whether or not to sign the surrender warrant. 

(b)  Based  on  the  resulting  analysis  of  relevant  information,  the 
     Secretary may decide to surrender the fugitive to the requesting 
     State,  to  deny  surrender  of  the  fugitive,  or  to  surrender  the 
     fugitive subject to conditions.                                 

22 C.F.R. § 95.3.  The Ninth Circuit has held that this procedure creates a “narrow 
liberty  interest”  under  which  the  Secretary  of  State  “must  make  a  torture 
determination  before  surrendering  an  extraditee  who  makes  a  CAT  claim.”  
Trinidad y Garcia v. Thomas, 683 F.3d 952, 956-57 (9th Cir. 2012) (en banc).  

Beyond that, however, “[t]he doctrine of separation of powers and the rule of non-
inquiry block any inquiry into the substance of the Secretary’s declaration.”  Id. at 
957 (citing Munaf, 553 U.S. 674).  No circuit court has afforded any broader habeas 
review to extraditees.                                                    

In  this  case,  the  State  Department  has  twice  affirmed  that  it  considered 
Kapoor’s claim but decided that her extradition would not violate CAT.  Having 
ensured that the department made the requisite determination, the Court can award 

no further relief.                                                        
                          III                                        
Accordingly, the petition for a writ of habeas corpus is denied.     
SO ORDERED.                                                          


                              _/S/ Frederic Block___________         
                                FREDERIC BLOCK                       
                              Senior United States District Judge    
Brooklyn, New York                                                        
September 20, 2022