UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
                   DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                             
___________________________________                                       
                                  )                                      
DAVID KEANE,                       )                                      
                                  )                                      
                   Plaintiff,     )                                      
                                  )                                      
v.                                 )         Civil Action                 
                                  )         No. 24-10399-PBS             
EXPEDITORS INTERNATIONAL OF        )                                      
WASHINGTON, INC., and EXPEDITORS   )                                      
HONG KONG, LIMITED,                )                                      
                                  )                                      
                   Defendants.    )                                      
______________________________     )                                      

                     MEMORANDUM AND ORDER                                
                        August 22, 2024                                  
Saris, D.J.                                                               
                         INTRODUCTION                                    
    Plaintiff David Keane brings this action against his former          
employers,   Expeditors   International   of   Washington,   Inc.         
(“Expeditors US”) and Expeditors Hong Kong Limited (“Expeditors           
HK”), advancing Title VII and several state law claims arising out        
of the termination of his employment. For over twenty-five years,         
Keane worked as an account manager for Defendants. For the first          
twenty  years  of  his  employment,  he  resided  and  worked  in         
Massachusetts  as  an  employee  of  Expeditors  US.  In  2018,  he       
relocated to Hong Kong, continuing to manage the same account for         
five more years. According to Keane, Defendants targeted him for          
termination based on his gender and national origin. Although most        
of the alleged discriminatory conduct occurred in Hong Kong, the          
negotiation and execution of Keane’s initial employment agreement         
occurred in Massachusetts. Both Defendants move to dismiss for            

lack of personal jurisdiction and under the doctrine of forum non         
conveniens. After hearing, the Court ALLOWS Defendants’ motion to         
dismiss (Dkt. 23).                                                        
                      FACTUAL BACKGROUND                                 
    Keane’s complaint alleges the following facts, which at this         
stage the Court accepts as true. In 1998, Keane began working for         
Expeditors US at the company’s office in Peabody, Massachusetts.          
Expeditors  US  is  a  Washington-incorporated  entity  with  its         
principal place of business in Seattle, Washington. It is a Fortune       
500  company  that  provides  logistics  services  and  supply  chain     
solutions  for  clients,  such  as  freight  forwarding,   vendor         
consolidation, and cargo insurance. As a Global Account Manager,          

Keane oversaw the rapid expansion of the account for Lenovo Group         
Limited, a Chinese technology enterprise. Based on his success            
with  the  Lenovo  account,  in  2016  the  company  asked  Keane  to     
relocate to Hong Kong to manage the account from abroad, which he         
declined. In early 2018, the company pressured Keane to accept the        
relocation, this time by threatening termination. Keane reached a         
mutual  oral  agreement  with  Expeditors  US  that  his  relocation      
overseas would be temporary until a replacement employee could be         
found, at which time Keane would be reinstated to his job in the          
Massachusetts office.                                                     
    In  July  2018,  while  still  living  in  Massachusetts,  Keane     

signed a written employment agreement that set forth the terms for        
his  relocation  and  job  in  Hong  Kong.  See  Dkt. 25-1  (“2018        
Agreement”).  The  2018  Agreement  offered  Keane  employment  with      
“Expeditors International of Washington Inc. Regional Office –-           
North Asia” and included a Hong Kong choice of law provision and          
a Hong Kong forum selection clause. See id. at 2, 8. Keane signed         
the agreement, as did Allen J. Wang in his role as “Senior Vice           
President -- North Asia.” Dkt. 25-1 at 8-9. In September 2018,            
Keane relocated to Hong Kong and began working at Expeditors HK.          
Expeditors  HK  is  a  wholly-owned  subsidiary  of  Expeditors  US,      
incorporated in Hong Kong and with its principal place of business        
in Hong Kong.                                                             

    In 2019, after about one year of working in Hong Kong, Keane         
was  accused  by  a  co-worker  of  engaging  in  unethical  business     
relationships with his client at Lenovo. After investigating, an          
in-house attorney determined that the accusation lacked evidence.         
Keane became frustrated that Expeditors HK failed to impose any           
disciplinary  action  on  the  co-worker  who  brought  the  false        
allegations against him. Four years later, on September 21, 2023,         
Keane attended a company-hosted dinner at a hotel in Hong Kong.           
After  the  dinner,  Keane  was  notified  of  a  sexual  harassment      
complaint  made  against  him  by  a  sales  representative  who  was     
present at the dinner. She alleged that Keane had grabbed her arm         
and kissed her shoulder without her consent at the dinner.                

    On September 25, 2023, four days after the company dinner,           
Expeditors HK presented Keane with a revised employment agreement,        
which  he  signed.  See  Dkt. 25-2  (“2023  Agreement”).  The  new        
agreement changed the name of his employer to “Expeditors Hong            
Kong  Limited”  and  added  a  provision  that  stated:  “The  Company    
[Expeditors HK] acknowledges that your employment with the Company        
commenced on 1 September 2018 and will recognize that date for the        
purpose of all service-related terms.” See id. at 2. The 2023             
Agreement also stated that it superseded and replaced the 2018            
Agreement. See id.                                                        
    In  December 2023,  Keane’s  supervisor  informed  him  at  a        
meeting in the Hong Kong office that his employment was terminated.       

Following his termination, Keane returned to Massachusetts, where         
he currently resides.                                                     
                     PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND                               
    In January 2024, Keane filed an EEOC complaint in Boston,            
Massachusetts. Keane received a “Notice of the Right to Sue” and          
timely  filed  a  complaint  in  this  Court.  The  crux  of  Keane’s     
allegations is that Defendants “devised and implemented a covert          
program  designed  to  clandestinely  reduce  headcount   without         
resorting to layoffs,” and it was this program that “dismantled           
critical safeguards intended to prevent discriminatory practices          
and  protect  due  process.”  Dkt. 1  at  2.  Keane’s  complaint  also    
alleges that Defendants engaged in a discriminatory pattern of            

terminating American employees from the Hong Kong office. See id.         
at 36. Keane alleges the following six counts in his complaint:           
(I) violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act against both           
Defendants; (II) breach of oral contract against Expeditors US;           
(III) breach  of  the  2018  Agreement  against  Expeditors   US;         
(IV) breach  of  the   2023  Agreement  against  Expeditors  HK;          
(V) interference with prospective business relations against both         
Defendants; and (VI) negligent infliction of emotional distress           
against both Defendants.                                                  
                        LEGAL STANDARD                                   
    Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(2) allows a defendant          
to move to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction. The plaintiff       

bears the burden of establishing a prima facie case of personal           
jurisdiction over the defendant. See Sawtelle v. Farrell, 70 F.3d         
1381, 1387 (1st Cir. 1995). “Under the prima facie standard, the          
inquiry is whether the plaintiff has proffered evidence which, if         
credited, is sufficient to support findings of all facts essential        
to personal jurisdiction.” Phillips v. Prairie Eye Ctr., 530 F.3d         
22,  26  (1st  Cir.  2008).  Courts  “must  accept  the  plaintiff’s      
(properly documented) evidentiary proffers as true for the purpose        
of  determining  the  adequacy  of  the  prima  facie  jurisdictional     
showing  and  construe  them  in  the  light  most  congenial  to  the    
plaintiff’s jurisdictional claim.” Id. (quoting Daynard v. Ness,          
Motley, Loadholt, Richardson & Poole, P.A., 290 F.3d 42, 51 (1st          

Cir. 2002)) (cleaned up). In order to make a prima facie showing          
of jurisdiction, “the plaintiff ordinarily cannot rest upon the           
pleadings but is obliged to adduce evidence of specific facts.”           
Foster-Miller, Inc. v. Babcock & Wilcox Can., 46 F.3d 138, 145            
(1st Cir. 1995).                                                          
                          DISCUSSION                                     
I.   Personal Jurisdiction                                                
    Defendants move to dismiss Keane’s complaint on the grounds          
that the Court lacks personal jurisdiction. To establish personal         
jurisdiction over both Expeditors US and Expeditors HK, Keane “must       
meet the requirements of both the Massachusetts long-arm statute          
and  the  Due  Process  Clause  of  the  Fourteenth  Amendment.”  See     

Cossart v. United Excel Corp., 804 F.3d 13, 18 (1st Cir. 2015).           
    “The jurisdictional requirements imposed by the Massachusetts        
long-arm  statute  are  quite  similar  to,  though  not  completely      
congruent with, the jurisdictional requirements imposed by the Due        
Process  Clause.”  Baskin-Robbins  Franchising  LLC  v.  Alpenrose        
Dairy,  Inc.,  825  F.3d  28,  34  (1st  Cir.  2016).  “Because  the      
[Massachusetts] long-arm statute imposes specific constraints on          
the exercise of personal jurisdiction that are not coextensive            
with the parameters of due process, . . . a determination under           
the  long-arm  statute   is  to  precede  consideration  of   the         
constitutional question.” SCVNGR, Inc. v. Punchh, Inc., 85 N.E.3d         
50, 52 (Mass. 2017). Section 3(a) of the Massachusetts long-arm           

statute, upon which Keane relies, provides for the exercise of            
jurisdiction over a defendant when the cause of action at issue           
arises from its transaction of business in the Commonwealth. See          
Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 223A, § 3(a). To find jurisdiction pursuant to        
Section 3(a),  “the  facts  must  satisfy  two  requirements:  1) the     
defendant  must  have  transacted  business  in  Massachusetts,  and      
2) the  plaintiff’s claim  must  have  arisen  from  the  defendant’s     
transaction of such business.” Sigros v. Walt Disney World Co.,           
129 F. Supp. 2d 56, 63 (D. Mass. 2001). The primary inquiry is            
“whether  the   defendant  attempted   to  participate   in   the         
commonwealth’s economic life.” United Elec., Radio & Mach. Workers        
of Am. v. 163 Pleasant St. Corp., 960 F.2d 1080, 1087 (1st Cir.           

1992).                                                                    
    Under the due process analysis, constitutional due process           
demands that the defendant must have sufficient contacts with the         
forum  state  such  that  exercising  jurisdiction  does  not  offend     
“traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.” Int’l         
Shoe Co. v. State of Wash., 326 U.S. 310, 316 (1945). Here, Keane         
makes no claim for general jurisdiction. See Harlow v. Children’s         
Hosp., 432 F.3d 50, 57 (1st Cir. 2005) (explaining that general           
jurisdiction requires defendants have continuous and systematic           
contacts with the forum state). Therefore, the Court’s analysis           
focuses on specific personal jurisdiction, which involves three           
elements: relatedness, purposeful availment, and reasonableness.          

Daynard, 290 F.3d at 60.                                                  
    Under the relatedness element, courts consider whether the           
claim directly arises out of, or relates to, the defendant’s forum        
state  activities.  See  id.  at  61.  “[T]he  defendant’s  in-state      
conduct must form an important, or at least material, element of          
proof in the plaintiff’s case.” Harlow, 432 F.3d at 61 (cleaned           
up). For breach of contract claims, courts look to whether “the           
defendant’s contacts with the forum were instrumental either in           
the formation of the contract or in its breach.” Phillips Exeter          
Acad. v. Howard Phillips Fund, Inc., 196 F.3d 284, 289 (1st Cir.          
1999). For tort claims, courts “must probe the causal nexus between       
the defendant’s contacts and the plaintiff’s cause of action.” Id.        

    Under  the  purposeful  availment  element,  courts  consider        
whether  “the  defendant’s  in-state  contacts  []  represent  a          
purposeful availment of the privilege of conducting activities in         
the forum state, thereby invoking the benefits and protections of         
that state’s laws and making the defendant’s involuntary presence         
before the state’s courts foreseeable.” Daynard, 290 F.3d at 60.          
“The two key focal points of this concept are voluntariness and           
foreseeability.” Adelson v. Hananel, 510 F.3d 43, 50 (1st Cir.            
2007).  Voluntariness  requires  that  the  defendant’s  contacts  be     
deliberate and “not based on the unilateral actions of another            
party.” Id. Foreseeability requires that the contacts must be of          
a nature that the defendant could “reasonably anticipate being            

haled into court there.” Id. (quoting World–Wide Volkswagen Corp.         
v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286, 297 (1980)).                                    
    Finally, under the reasonableness element, “the exercise of          
jurisdiction must, in light of the Gestalt factors, be reasonable.”       
Daynard, 290 F.3d at 60. The First Circuit considers the following        
Gestalt factors to assess reasonableness:                                 
    (1) the defendant’s burden of appearing [in the forum                
    state], (2) the forum state’s interest in adjudicating               
    the dispute, (3) the plaintiff’s interest in obtaining               
    convenient  and  effective  relief,  (4)  the  judicial              
    system’s  interest  in  obtaining  the  most  effective              
    resolution  of  the  controversy,  and  (5)  the  common             
    interests  of  all  sovereigns  in  promoting  substantive           
    social policies.                                                     
C.W. Downer & Co. v. Bioriginal Food & Sci. Corp., 771 F.3d 59, 69        
(1st Cir. 2014) (quoting Ticketmaster-N.Y., Inc. v. Alioto, 26            
F.3d 201, 209 (1st Cir. 1994)). This part of the analysis “evokes         
a sliding scale: the weaker the plaintiff’s showing on the first          
two  prongs  (relatedness  and  purposeful  availment),  the  less  a     
defendant  need  show  in  terms  of  unreasonableness  to  defeat        
jurisdiction.” Ticketmaster, 26 F.3d at 210.                              
    A. Expeditors HK’s Contacts                                          
    Keane  fails  to  establish  a  prima  facie  case  of  personal     
jurisdiction  over  Expeditors  HK.  Expeditors  HK  is  a  Hong  Kong    
company registered to do business in Hong Kong and maintains a            
principal office in Hong Kong. The Regional Vice President for            
Expeditors HK, Kaiser Lam, states in his affidavit that “Expeditors       
HK does not transact business in Massachusetts, did not contract          

to supply services or things in Massachusetts, does not regularly         
solicit business or engage in a persistent course of conduct in           
Massachusetts, and does not have an interest in using or possessing       
real property in Massachusetts.” Dkt. 25 at 2. In contrast, Keane         
recalls that while he was employed at Expeditors HK, he “arranged         
some sales and deliveries to customers located in Massachusetts”          
and  that  “Expeditors  HK  had  a  revenue  sharing  agreement  with     
Expeditors  [US]  regarding  all  air  shipments  from  Hong  Kong  to    
Massachusetts.” Dkt. 30 at 4; Dkt. 42 at 3.                               
    Even  assuming  Expeditors  HK  arranged  some  shipments  to        
Massachusetts,  Keane’s  discrimination,  breach  of  contract,  and      
tort claims do not arise from those contacts. Instead, the factual        

allegations underpinning Keane’s claims against Expeditors HK --          
for  example,   the  alleged   discrimination  against   American         
foreigners,  the  company  dinner  party,  the  sexual  harassment        
complaint, the investigation, the disciplinary hearing, and the           
resulting  termination  --  all   occurred  in  Hong  Kong,   not         
Massachusetts. Keane has not met his burden under Section 3(a) of         
the Massachusetts long-arm statute because his causes of action do        
not arise from Expeditors HK’s activities in Massachusetts. See           
Access Now, Inc. v. Otter Prods., LLC, 280 F. Supp. 3d 287, 291           
(D. Mass. 2017) (“[A] claim arises from a defendant’s transaction         
of business in the forum State if the claim was made possible by,         
or lies in the wake of, the transaction of business in the forum          

State.”). Nor has Keane sustained his burden of establishing the          
relatedness element of the due process analysis.                          
    In an attempt to connect Expeditors HK to Massachusetts, Keane       
argues that both “Defendants intentionally engaged with [Keane]           
while he was based in Massachusetts, with the aim of transferring         
him and the lucrative Lenovo account that he managed to Expeditors        
HK.” Dkt. 29 at 10. However, as set forth in Keane’s affidavit, it        
was Brian McGinnis, a director of Expeditors US, who approached           
Keane numerous times about relocating to Hong Kong and convinced          
him to sign the 2018 Agreement with “Expeditors International of          
Washington Inc. Regional Office –- North Asia.” See Dkt. 30 at 2-         
3. The agreement was signed by Allen J. Wang in his role as “Senior       

Vice President -- North Asia.” Dkt. 25-1 at 8. Keane does not             
identify any director or officer of Expeditors HK involved in the         
formation or negotiation of the 2018 Agreement.                           
    Because Expeditors HK does not have the requisite minimum            
contacts  with  Massachusetts,  the  Court  need  not  reach  the         
reasonableness element. See Sawtelle, 70 F.3d at 1394 (“[W]e note         
that  a  failure  to  demonstrate  the  necessary  minimum  contacts      
eliminates the need even to reach the issue of reasonableness”).          
Keane has not carried his burden in showing that the Court could          
properly  exercise  personal  jurisdiction  over  Expeditors  HK.         
Accordingly, the motion to dismiss with respect to Expeditors HK          
is ALLOWED.                                                               
    B. Expeditors US’s Contacts                                          

    The  Court   next  turns  to   analyze  whether   exercising         
jurisdiction over Expeditors US is proper under the Massachusetts         
long-arm  statute  and  the  Due  Process  Clause.  Expeditors  US        
maintains a facility in Peabody, Massachusetts, which at the time         
of  Keane’s  employment  had  approximately  120  employees.  Keane       
himself  worked  at  this  Massachusetts  facility  for  nearly  two      
decades. Brian McGinnis, a director of Expeditors US, approached          
Keane when he was living in Massachusetts and negotiated the 2018         
Agreement  that  resulted  in  Keane’s  relocation  to  Hong  Kong.       
Expeditors  US’s actions  in  Massachusetts  therefore  satisfy  the      
transacting-business requirement under the long-arm statute. See          

Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 223A, § 3(a). By hiring employees and forming         
contracts in the state, Expeditors US also invoked the benefits           
and privileges of doing business in Massachusetts, thus satisfying        
the purposeful availment inquiry under the due process analysis.          
    To determine whether Keane’s claims arise from the alleged           
in-forum activity, the Court considers each of the five claims            
brought against Expeditors US individually.1 See Phillips Exeter,         

1 Count IV alleges breach of the 2023 Agreement and was brought           
against Expeditors HK only.                                               
196 F.3d at 289 (“Questions of specific jurisdiction are always           
tied  to  the  particular  claims  asserted.”).  Keane’s  three  non-     
contract  claims  arise  directly  out  of  his  allegedly  wrongful      

termination  and  the  investigation  and  disciplinary  proceedings      
that  preceded  it.  Specifically,  the  Title  VII  claim  (Count I)     
alleges that Keane “was terminated from his employment due to his         
sex and/or national origin, in violation of Title VII of the Civil        
Rights Act.” Dkt. 1 at 99. The interference claim (Count V) alleges       
that Expeditors US interfered with Keane’s prospective business           
relations with clients by labelling him a ”sex harasser” during           
their internal investigation and disciplinary proceedings. Id. at         
111. And the claim of negligent infliction of emotional distress          
(Count VI) similarly alleges that Expeditors US subjected Keane to        
emotional  distress  by  “falsely  accusing  [Keane]  of   sexual         
harassment, failing to conduct a fair investigation, unlawfully           

summarily  dismissing  him  and  publicizing  the  false  allegations     
without just cause.” Id. at 113. Given that the investigation,            
disciplinary hearing, and termination all occurred in Hong Kong,          
Counts I, V, and VI do not arise out of Expeditors US’s forum state       
activities  and  are  therefore  dismissed  for  lack  of  personal       
jurisdiction under both the Massachusetts long-arm statute and the        
Due Process Clause. See Azumi LLC v. Lott & Fischer, PL, 621 F.           
Supp. 3d 219, 224 (D. Mass. 2022) (finding no jurisdiction under          
long-arm  statute  where  claims  did  not  arise  from  defendant’s      
purported connections to Massachusetts); Phillips, 530 F.3d at 27         
(noting  that   plaintiff  must   demonstrate  that   all   three         
jurisdictional  elements  under   the  Due  Process  clause  are          

satisfied).                                                               
    The inquiry is different, however, with respect to Keane’s           
contract claims against Expeditors US (Counts II and III). Where          
the cause of action is an alleged breach of contract, the Court           
considers whether the defendant’s activity in the forum state was         
“instrumental  either  in  the  formation  of  the  contract  or  its     
breach.”  See  Phillips  Exeter,  196  F.3d  at  289.  In  Adelson  v.    
Hananel, the First Circuit affirmed a district court’s finding of         
relatedness where the contract between the parties was formalized         
and entered into in Massachusetts, the forum state. 510 F.3d at           
49. Here, both the alleged oral contract and the 2018 Agreement           
were  negotiated  and  entered  into  while  Keane  was  living  in       

Massachusetts. Keane states that Brian McGinnis, a director of            
Expeditors US, targeted and pressured him into relocating to Hong         
Kong. Keane alleges that he eventually relented upon threat of            
termination  and  entered  into  a  mutual  oral  agreement  with         
Expeditors US. According to Keane, his “eventual return to his            
original position in the Massachusetts office was a fundamental           
component  of  the  oral  agreement.”  Dkt. 1  at  102.  Keane  and       
Expeditors US then negotiated and signed the 2018 Agreement, which        
set forth the terms of his employment in Hong Kong. Defendants            
argue that the mere act of signing the agreement in Massachusetts         
was incidental to the overall formation of the agreement. However,        
the complaint alleges more than just the signing of the agreement         

in  Massachusetts  --  it  alleges  that  Keane  was  pressured  into     
relocating multiple times from 2016 to 2018 and that difficult            
negotiations  were  conducted  in  Massachusetts  prior  to   the         
execution  of  the  2018  Agreement.  See  Adelson,  510  F.3d  at  49    
(“[N]othing  could  be  more  instrumental  in  the  formation  of  a     
contract than the literal act of forming the contract itself.”).          
The Court finds that Keane’s contract claims against Expeditors US        
arise from and are related to Expeditors US’s activities within           
the forum state. Therefore, both requirements of the Massachusetts        
long-arm statute have been met with respect to Counts II and III.         
The  relatedness  element  of  the  due  process  analysis  is  also      
satisfied with respect to these counts.                                   
    C. Reasonableness                                                    

    The final question is whether exercising jurisdiction over           
Expeditors  US  with  respect  to  Keane’s  contract  claims  is          
reasonable. A number of the Gestalt factors weigh in favor of a           
finding of reasonableness. First, Keane, who currently resides in         
Massachusetts, has a compelling interest in bringing his claim in         
the forum state. See Ticketmaster, 26 F.3d at 211 (noting that            
courts “accord plaintiff’s choice of forum a degree of deference          
in respect to the issue of its own convenience”). Second, there is        
no  unusual  burden  for  Expeditors  US,  a  domestic  Fortune 500       
company, to appear in a forum state where the company already             
operates  a  facility.  Third,  Massachusetts  has  an  interest  in      

adjudicating claims involving contracts negotiated and formed in          
the state. Thus, with respect to Counts II and III, Expeditors            
US’s contacts with Massachusetts establish “minimum contacts” in          
such a manner that it does not “offend traditional notions of fair        
play  and  substantial  justice”  for  Keane  to  bring  his  contract    
claims in the forum state. See Int’l Shoe, 326 U.S. at 316.               
    D. Alter Ego Theory                                                  
    Finally,  Keane  alleges  that  Expeditors  HK  is  subject  to      
personal  jurisdiction  as  Expeditors  US’s  alter  ego.  In  his        
complaint,  Keane  alleges  that  “Expeditors  HK  functions  as  an      
extension  and  alter  ego  of  the  US  parent  company”  because        
“Expeditors HK shares common management with Expeditors [US] and          

the  CEO  of  Expeditors  is  a  director  of  Expeditors  HK”  and       
“Expeditors  HK’s  management  structure  is  so  intertwined  with       
Expeditors  that  they  effectively  operate  as  a  single  entity.”     
Dkt. 1 at 7-8, 96. For example, Keane contends that Allen J. Wang         
serves  as  Senior  Vice  President  of  both  Defendants,  and  that     
Jeffrey Dickerman serves as Vice President and General Counsel of         
both companies as well.                                                   
    In  general,   courts  “have   presumed  the   institutional         
independence  of parent  and  subsidiary  when  determining  whether      
jurisdiction may be asserted over the parent solely on the basis          
of the subsidiary’s contacts with the forum.” Donatelli v. Nat’l          
Hockey  League,  893  F.2d  459,  465  (1st  Cir.  1990).  The  record    

reflects  that  Expeditors  HK  “maintains  its  own  ledgers  and        
accounting books; prepares its own business plans, payroll, budget        
and financial statements . . . and controls the decisions regarding       
hiring and firing of its employees.” Dkt. 25 at 3. Besides pointing       
to the overlapping leadership of the companies, Keane offers no           
evidence to refute the fact that Expeditors US and Expeditors HK          
observe  corporate  formalities  as  distinct  entities.  See  Escude     
Cruz v. Ortho Pharm. Corp., 619 F.2d 902, 905 (1st Cir. 1980)             
(holding that “allegations of interlocking directorates and stock         
ownership will not alone suffice” to support an alter-ego theory          
for jurisdictional purposes). Keane has not provided sufficient           
evidence upon which the Court could plausibly find jurisdiction           

over Expeditors HK.                                                       
II.  Forum Non Conveniens                                                
    Defendants also move to dismiss Keane’s claims pursuant to           
the doctrine of forum non conveniens. “The doctrine of forum non          
conveniens . . . permits a court to dismiss a case because the            
chosen forum (despite the presence of jurisdiction and venue) is          
so inconvenient that it would be unfair to conduct the litigation         
in that place.” Nandjou v. Marriott Int’l, Inc., 985 F.3d 135, 140        
(1st Cir. 2021) (quoting Howe v. Goldcorp Invs., Ltd., 946 F.2d           
944, 947 (1st Cir. 1991)). A dismissal on these grounds requires          
the plaintiff to file his suit in a more convenient forum in order        
to obtain relief. Id. As the party moving for dismissal, Expeditors       

US “bears the burden of showing both that an adequate alternative         
forum exists and that considerations of convenience and judicial          
efficiency strongly favor litigating the claim in the alternative         
forum.” Imamura v. Gen. Elec. Co., 957 F.3d 98, 106 (1st Cir. 2020)       
(quoting Iragorri v. Int’l Elevator, Inc., 203 F.3d 8, 12 (1st            
Cir. 2000)).                                                              
    First,  the  Court  looks  to  whether  Hong  Kong  provides  an     
adequate  alternative  forum   for  this  dispute.  An   adequate         
alternative forum exists when “(1) all parties can come within            
that forum’s jurisdiction, and (2) the parties will not be deprived       
of all remedies or treated unfairly, even though they may not enjoy       
the same benefits as they might receive in an American court.” Id.        

(quoting Mercier v. Sheraton Int’l, Inc., 935 F.2d 419, 424 (1st          
Cir. 1991)). Here, Defendants are “amenable to process in Hong            
Kong  because  [they]  conduct[]  business  in  the  country.”  Carpi     
Trading Corp. v. Bank Bumiputra Malaysia Berhad, 812 F. Supp. 1041,       
1044 (N.D. Cal. 1993). Not only is Expeditors HK a Hong Kong-based        
company, but Expeditors US agreed to “submit to the non-exclusive         
jurisdiction of the Courts of the [Hong Kong Special Administrative       
Region]” for claims arising out of the 2018 Agreement or Keane’s          
employment. Dkt. 25-1 at 8; see Contact Lumber Co. v. P.T. Moges          
Shipping  Co.,  918  F.2d  1446,  1450  (9th  Cir.  1990)  (affirming     
dismissal   where  defendants   submitted  to   jurisdiction  in          
alternative forum).                                                       

    Keane argues that Hong Kong is not an adequate forum because         
its legal system does not allow for contingency fee arrangements          
and  its  discovery  procedures  are  more  restrictive  than  in  the    
United  States.  However,  such  procedural  differences  are  not        
sufficient for finding an alternative forum to be inadequate. See         
Piper Aircraft Co. v. Reyno, 454 U.S. 235, 250-55 (1981) (holding         
that “dismissal on grounds of forum non conveniens may be granted         
even though the law applicable in the alternative forum is less           
favorable  to  the  plaintiff’s  chance  of  recovery”).  Keane  also     
argues that Hong Kong courts are not appropriate due to political         
instability in the region. However, “[n]umerous courts . . . have         
found Hong Kong to be an adequate alternative forum for contract          

and tort disputes.” Easy Spirit LLC v. DBS Bank LTD, No. 19-7290,         
2019 WL 13133363, at *4 (C.D. Cal. Dec. 10, 2019) (listing cases)         
(“Plaintiff’s descriptions of political unrest in Hong Kong do not        
demonstrate  that  the  unrest  has  rendered  the  judicial  system      
incapable of resolving Plaintiff’s claim.”). Thus, the Court finds        
that Hong Kong provides an adequate alternative forum to adjudicate       
Keane’s contract claims.                                                  
    In addition to an adequate available forum, “the defendant           
must show that the compendium of factors relevant to the private          
and  public  interests  implicated  by  the  case  strongly  favors       
dismissal.” Iragorri, 203 F.3d at 12. Relevant private interest           
factors include:                                                          

    the  relative  ease  of  access  to  sources  of  proof;             
    availability  [and  cost]  of  compulsory  process  for              
    attendance  of  unwilling,  and  the  cost  of  obtaining            
    attendance of willing, witnesses; possibility of view of             
    premises, if view would be appropriate to the action;                
    and all other practical problems that make trial of a                
    case easy, expeditious[,] and inexpensive.                           

Imamura, 957 F.3d at 107 (quoting Gulf Oil Corp. v. Gilbert, 330          
U.S. 501, 508 (1947)). Here, the locus of injury is in Hong Kong.         
In his complaint, Keane alleges that Expeditors US breached the           
oral agreement and the 2018 Agreement by wrongfully terminating           
him, not conducting a fair disciplinary proceeding, and failing to        
reinstate  him  to  his  job  in  Massachusetts.  The  2018  Agreement    
provides that Keane could be “dismissed without notice and payment”       
from the company for misconduct, which included “[v]iolation of           
any of the policies articulated in the Company’s Codes of Conduct”        
and “[s]erious or persistent breach [] of any of the terms and            
conditions  of  employment.”  Dkt.  25-1  at  5.  Thus,  determining      
whether  Defendants  terminated  Keane  with  or  without  cause  is      
integral  to  adjudicating  Keane’s  contract  claims.  The  events       
leading  up  to  Keane’s  termination  all  occurred  in  Hong  Kong,     
including the alleged sexual harassment, the investigation, the           
disciplinary  proceeding,  and  the  termination  itself.  Although       
Keane argues, without support, that witnesses are located around          
the world, the Court finds that the location of evidentiary sources       
is at the center of gravity of the events surrounding Keane’s             
termination, which lies in Hong Kong.                                     

    Moreover, as explained above, because the Court does not have        
jurisdiction  over  Expeditors  HK  or  Keane’s  non-contract  claims     
against Expeditors US, Keane would have to pursue those claims in         
Hong Kong. There is a benefit to resolving Keane’s contract claims        
in the same forum and proceeding as his other claims, not only to         
avoid inconsistent findings or rulings, but also to save litigants        
the expense of parallel proceedings.                                      
    The public factors also weigh in favor dismissal. Relevant           
public factors include:                                                   
    the  administrative  difficulties  flowing  from  court              
    congestion;  the  ‘local  interest  in  having  localized            
    controversies decided at home’; the interest in having               
    the trial of a diversity case in a forum that is at home             
    with the law that must govern the action; the avoidance              
    of unnecessary problems in conflict of laws, or in the               
    application  of  foreign  law;  and  the  unfairness  of             
    burdening citizens in an unrelated forum with jury duty.             

Imamura, 957 F.3d at 107 (quoting Piper, 454 U.S. at 241). Here,          
the 2018 Agreement is expressly governed by Hong Kong law. See            
Dkt. 25-1  at  8  (“This  agreement  and  your  employment  shall  be     
governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Hong         
Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR).”). In general, there          
is a preference for a forum to apply laws with which it is familiar.      
See Dow Jones & Co. v. Juwai Ltd., No. 21-7284, 2023 WL 2561588,          
at *11 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 17, 2023) (“While this Court can address            
questions of Hong Kong law, Hong Kong courts are plainly better           
suited  to  the  task.  This  alone  is  a  strong  --  though  not       

dispositive -- factor favoring dismissal.”). Finally, although the        
contracts at issue were executed in Massachusetts, Hong Kong has          
a greater interest in resolving what is, at its core, an employment       
dispute involving a Hong Kong employee and a Hong Kong company.           
    In summary, Defendants have met their burden of showing that         
Hong Kong is an adequate alternative forum for Keane’s claims, and        
the balance of private and public interest factors weigh in favor         
of adjudication in a foreign forum. Although deference is given to        
Keane’s  preference  for  his  home  forum,  Hong  Kong  is  the  more    
appropriate and convenient forum for adjudicating the dispute in          
its  entirety.  Accordingly,  Keane’s  contract  claims   against         
Expeditors US (Counts II and III) are dismissed on the ground of          
forum non conveniens.2                                                    

                             ORDER                                       
    For the reasons stated above, the Court ALLOWS the motion to         
dismiss  all  claims  against  Expeditors  HK  for  lack  of  personal    
jurisdiction. The Court also ALLOWS the motion to dismiss Counts I        

2  After  the  motion  to  dismiss  hearing,  both  parties  filed        
supplementary  briefing  regarding  Keane’s  intention  of  seeking       
leave to amend his complaint to add a Racketeer Influenced and            
Corrupt Organizations (“RICO”) Act claim and a promissory estoppel        
claim. See Dkts. 51, 54. Since the action is dismissed in its             
entirety, the Court need not address these arguments.                     
(Title  VII  claim),  V  (interference  with  prospective  business       
relations), and VI (negligent infliction of emotional distress)           
against Expeditors US for lack of personal jurisdiction. Finally,         

the Court ALLOWS the motion to dismiss Counts II (breach of oral          
contract) and III (breach of 2018 Agreement) against Expeditors US        
on the ground of forum non conveniens.                                    

SO ORDERED.                                                               
                                  /s/ PATTI B. SARIS__________           
                                  Hon. Patti B. Saris                    
                                  United States District Judge