UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                              
                     DISTRICT OF MAINE                                  

AMBER LAVIGNE,                )                                           
                            )                                           
   Plaintiff,               )                                           
                            )                                           
             v.             )    2:23-cv-00158-JDL                      
                            )                                           
GREAT SALT BAY COMMUNITY      )                                           
SCHOOL BOARD,                 )                                           
                            )                                           
   Defendant.               )                                           

ORDER ON MOTION TO DISMISS FOR FAILURE TO STATE A CLAIM                 

   Plaintiff Amber Lavigne brings this action against Defendant Great Salt Bay 
Community School Board.1  Lavigne’s claims center on events that occurred in late 
2022 and early 2023 concerning her child, A.B., who was a student at Great Salt Bay 
Community School in Damariscotta from September 2019 until December 8, 2022.  
Lavigne’s Complaint (ECF No. 1) asserts four constitutional violations: three based 
on substantive due process rights (Counts I, II, and III) and the fourth based on 
procedural due process rights (Count IV).  The School Board moves to dismiss the 
Complaint pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) for failure to state a claim (ECF No. 
12).  A hearing was held on the motion on November 1, 2023, and the parties 
subsequently submitted additional case citations for the Court to consider (ECF Nos. 
24, 25).  For reasons I will explain, I grant the School Board’s motion and order the 
Complaint dismissed.                                                      

1  The Complaint also named as Defendants four individuals associated with the School and the 
Central Lincoln County School System.  The individual defendants have been dismissed from the case 
(ECF No. 23).                                                             
                      I.  BACKGROUND                                    
A.   Factual Allegations                                                  
   I treat the following facts derived from the Complaint and its attachments as 
true for the purpose of evaluating the School Board’s motion to dismiss.  See Grajales 

v. P.R. Ports Auth., 682 F.3d 40, 44 (1st Cir. 2012) (“[W]e accept the truth of all well-
pleaded facts and draw all reasonable inferences therefrom in the pleader’s favor.”).   
   Amber Lavigne (“Lavigne”) lives in Newcastle, Maine, and is the mother of 
three children, one of whom, A.B., was a thirteen-year-old student at Great Salt Bay 
Community School (“School”) at the time of the relevant events.  Defendant Great 
Salt Bay Community School Board (“School Board”) is the governing body for the 
School,  which  serves  children  from  three  Maine  communities:  Newcastle, 

Damariscotta, and Bremen.                                                 
   In early December 2022, Lavigne came across a chest binder—“a device used 
to flatten a female’s chest so as to appear male”—in A.B.’s bedroom.  ECF No. 1 at 5, 
¶ 20.  A.B. told Lavigne that a social worker at the School had both provided A.B. 
with the chest binder and explained how to use it.  Lavigne “is informed and believes, 
and on that basis alleges,” that the social worker simultaneously gave A.B. a second 

chest binder, explained that he would not tell A.B.’s parents about the chest binders, 
and said that “A.B. need not do so either.”  ECF No. 1 at 6, ¶¶ 22-23.  The School had 
not informed Lavigne about the chest binders before she found one in A.B.’s bedroom.   
   Around the same time, Lavigne learned that A.B. had previously adopted and 
was using a different name and different pronouns at school.  At A.B.’s request, two 
social workers used A.B.’s self-identified name and pronouns when addressing A.B. 
at school; other school officials followed suit.  The School had not informed Lavigne 
about A.B.’s request or the actions of the school staff in response.      
   Lavigne met with the School’s principal and the Central Lincoln County School 

System’s superintendent on or around December 5, 2022.  They expressed sympathy 
and concern that information about A.B. had been withheld and concealed from 
Lavigne.  Two days later, however, the superintendent met with Lavigne and told her 
that no policy had been violated by giving the chest binders to A.B., or by school 
officials  using  A.B.’s  self-identified  name  and  pronouns,  without  first  informing 
Lavigne.  Lavigne withdrew A.B. from the School on December 8, 2022, and began 

homeschooling A.B.                                                        
   On December 12, 2022, agents from the Maine Office of Child and Family 
Services  visited  or  met  with  Lavigne  in  response  to  an  anonymous  report  that 
Lavigne  was  emotionally  abusive  toward  A.B.    The  agency  conducted  an 
investigation,  which  it  closed  on  January  13,  2023,  having  concluded  “that  the 
information obtained by the investigation did not support a finding of neglect or 
abuse.”  ECF No. 1 at 8, ¶ 36; see ECF No. 1-2 at 1.                      

   At the School Board’s meeting on December 14, 2022, Lavigne spoke publicly 
about what had happened regarding A.B., describing “the trust that had been broken 
by Defendants withholding and concealing vitally important information from her 
respecting her minor child’s psychosexual development.”  ECF No. 1 at 9, ¶ 38.  The 
School Board and its members did not respond to Lavigne’s comments at the meeting.  
   Thereafter, the School Board and the School’s principal issued a total of three 
written public statements relevant to Lavigne’s claims.2  First, on December 19, 2022, 
the School Board Chair issued a written statement addressing, among other things, 

“recent concerns that have been brought to the attention of the administration and 
Board,” and stating that the School Board’s policies comply with Maine law, “which 
protects the right of all students and staff, regardless of gender/gender identity, to 
have equal access to education, the supports and services available in our public 
schools, and the student’s right to privacy regardless of age.”  ECF No. 1-3 at 1.   
   Second, several weeks later on January 14, 2023, the School Board issued a 

written statement responding to bomb threats and recent controversy affecting the 
School.  The statement addressed “another bomb threat on Friday[,] January 13”; 
referred to a “false narrative” that had been spread by “certain parties” that had 
“given rise to the bomb threats”; and affirmed that “[a]ll of the Board’s policies comply 
with Maine law, and neither the Board nor school administration are aware of any 
violation of policy or law which requires further action at this time.”  ECF No. 1-4 at 
1.                                                                        

   Finally,  on  February  26,  2023,  the  School’s  principal  issued  a  written 
statement addressing questions related to school safety.  In it she noted that there 
had  been  a  “misunderstanding  of  [federal  and  state]  laws  pertaining  to  gender 
identity and privileged communication between school social workers and minor 


2  The statements are attached as exhibits to the Complaint (ECF Nos. 1-3, 1-4, 1-5).  See Trans-Spec 
Truck Serv., Inc. v. Caterpillar Inc., 524 F.3d 315, 321 (1st Cir. 2008) (“Exhibits attached to the 
complaint are properly considered part of the pleading ‘for all purposes,’ including Rule 12(b)(6).” 
(quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 10(c))).                                         
clients [resulting] in the school and staff members becoming targets for hate speech 
and on-going threats.”  ECF No. 1-5 at 1.  The letter noted further that state law 
protects school social workers from being required to share certain “information 

gathered during a counseling relation with a client or with the parent, guardian or a 
person or agency having legal custody of a minor client.”  ECF No. 1-5 at 1 (quoting 
20-A M.R.S.A. § 4008(2) (West 2024)).                                     
B.   Lavigne’s Legal Claims                                               
   Lavigne  asserts  that  the  School  Board  and  school  officials  violated  her 
fundamental right as a parent “to control and direct the care, custody, education, 

upbringing, and healthcare decisions, etc., of [her] children” by providing A.B. with 
chest binders and using A.B.’s self-identified name and pronouns without prior notice 
or providing a process through which Lavigne could “express her opinion respecting 
these practices.”  ECF No. 1 at 1-2, ¶¶ 2-3.  The Complaint contends that the School 
Board withheld and concealed information from Lavigne regarding the chest binders 
and A.B.’s use of a different name and pronouns “pursuant to a blanket policy, 

pattern,  and  practice  of  withholding  and  concealing  information  respecting 
‘gender-affirming’ treatment of minor children from parents.”  ECF No. 1 at 7, ¶ 29.  
The Complaint also asserts that the School Board’s actions deprived Lavigne of the 
opportunity  to  meaningfully  make  decisions  about  A.B.’s  care,  upbringing,  and 
education.                                                                
   The Complaint’s four counts all assert violations of Lavigne’s constitutional 
rights, actionable under 42 U.S.C.A. § 1983 (West 2024).  Three counts allege the 

School Board and school officials committed substantive due process violations under 
the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution by (1) providing chest 
binders to A.B. and instructing A.B. on their use without first informing Lavigne 
(Count I); (2) using A.B.’s self-identified name and pronouns and withholding that 

information  from  Lavigne  (Count  II);  and  (3)  adopting  Transgender  Students 
Guidelines that enable staff members to withhold information from parents (Count 
III).  For the fourth count, Lavigne alleges that she was deprived of procedural due 
process in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment because she was not afforded an 
opportunity to comment on school officials’ decisions to give A.B. chest binders or to 
use A.B.’s self-identified name and pronouns at school (Count IV).        

   In her Opposition to the Motion to Dismiss (ECF No. 16), however, Lavigne 
makes it clear that all counts in her Complaint center on her “right not to have 
information  about  decisions  actively  withheld  by  Defendants  pursuant  to  the 
Withholding Policy.”  See ECF No. 16 at 8 (discussing procedural due process claim); 
ECF  No.  16  at  10  (arguing  in  context  of  substantive  due  process  claims  that 
“Defendants  violated  Plaintiff’s  rights  by  withholding  and  even  concealing” 
information  from  Lavigne).    Lavigne’s  opposition  clarifies  further  that  the 

“Withholding Policy” underlying her claims, though “unwritten,” is established by the 
Defendants’ “policy, practice, and custom.”  ECF No. 16 at 3.  Although the Complaint 
never uses the phrase “Withholding Policy,”3 it conveys a similar theory, seeking “[a] 
declaratory judgment by the Court that Great Salt Bay Community School’s policy, 
pattern, and practice of withholding or concealing from parents, information about 


3  The phrase “Withholding Policy” appears for the first time in Lavigne’s Opposition to the Motion 
to Dismiss.  See ECF No. 16 at 3.                                         
the[ir] child’s psychosexual development, including their asserted gender identity, 
absent some specific showing of risk to the child, violates the Due Process Clause of 
the Fourteenth Amendment.”  ECF No. 1 at 20, ¶ A.  Lavigne also seeks an injunction, 

nominal and actual damages, and attorney’s fees and costs.                
                    II.  LEGAL STANDARD                                 
   To  survive  a  Rule  12(b)(6)  motion  to  dismiss,  a  complaint  “must  contain 
sufficient factual matter to state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.”4 
Rodríguez-Reyes  v.  Molina-Rodríguez,  711  F.3d  49,  53  (1st  Cir.  2013)  (quoting 
Grajales, 682 F.3d at 44).  Courts use a two-step approach to evaluate whether a 

complaint meets that standard.  “First, the court must distinguish ‘the complaint’s 
factual  allegations  (which  must  be  accepted  as  true)  from  its  conclusory  legal 
allegations (which need not be credited).’  Second, the court must determine whether 
the factual allegations are sufficient to support ‘the reasonable inference that the 
defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged.’”  García-Catalán v. United States, 734 
F.3d 100, 103 (1st Cir. 2013) (citation omitted) (first quoting Morales-Cruz v. Univ. of 

P.R., 676 F.3d 220, 224 (1st Cir. 2012); and then quoting Haley v. City of Bos., 657 
F.3d  39,  46  (1st  Cir.  2011)).    A  complaint  is  subject  to  dismissal  if  its  factual 

4  The School Board’s motion is properly evaluated as a Rule 12(b) motion to dismiss, and not a Rule 
12(c) motion for judgment on the pleadings, even though the School Board filed its motion to dismiss 
and Answer (ECF No. 13) on the same day.  A post-answer motion to dismiss should be treated as a 
motion for judgment on the pleadings, see Patrick v. Rivera-Lopez, 708 F.3d 15, 18 (1st Cir. 2013), but 
the School Board here filed the motion to dismiss slightly before the answer.  Even if the motion to 
dismiss is treated as having been filed “simultaneously with the answer, the district court will view 
the motion as having preceded the answer and thus as having been interposed in timely fashion.”  5C 
Charles Alan Wright & Arthur R. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure § 1361 (3d ed.).  In any event, 
the First Circuit has noted that “[c]onverting the grounds for a motion from Rule 12(b)(6) to Rule 12(c) 
‘does not affect our analysis inasmuch as the two motions are ordinarily accorded much the same 
treatment.’”  Rivera-Lopez, 708 F.3d at 18 (quoting Aponte-Torres v. Univ. of P.R., 445 F.3d 50, 54 (1st 
Cir. 2006)).                                                              
allegations “are too meager, vague, or conclusory to remove the possibility of relief 
from the realm of mere conjecture.”  S.E.C. v. Tambone, 597 F.3d 436, 442 (1st Cir. 
2010).                                                                    

   To establish that a municipality is liable under section 1983 for a deprivation 
of constitutional rights, a plaintiff must show both “that [the] plaintiff’s harm was 
caused by a constitutional violation,” and “that the [municipality is] responsible for 
that  violation,  an  element  which  has  its  own  components.”    Young  v.  City  of 
Providence ex rel. Napolitano, 404 F.3d 4, 25-26 (1st Cir. 2005).  I first consider the 
second issue: whether the Complaint adequately pleads facts that could plausibly 

support municipal liability under section 1983.  Concluding that it does not, I need 
not, and therefore do not, address the separate question of whether any of the alleged 
constitutional violations are adequately pleaded.                         
                        III.  ANALYSIS                                  
A.   Municipal  Liability  for  Alleged  Constitutional  Violations  Under 
   Monell v. Department of Social Services of the City of New York, 436 
   U.S. 658 (1978)                                                      
   Section 1983 permits a lawsuit against a person who, while acting under color 
of law, “subjects, or causes to be subjected, any citizen of the United States or other 
person within the jurisdiction thereof to the deprivation of any rights, privileges, or 
immunities secured by the Constitution and laws.”  42 U.S.C.A. § 1983.  The Supreme 
Court held in Monell v. Department of Social Services of the City of New York that 
municipalities can be proper defendants under section 1983.  436 U.S. 658, 690 (1978) 
(“Congress did intend municipalities and other local government units to be included 

among those persons to whom [section] 1983 applies.”).  Section 1983 municipal 
liability  principles  apply  to  school  boards  and  public  education  units  in  Maine, 
including a community school district such as the Great Salt Bay Community School 
District.  See, e.g., Doe v. Reg’l Sch. Unit No. 21, No. 2:19-[cv]-00341-NT, 2020 WL 

2820197 (D. Me. May 29, 2020) (applying municipal liability concepts to RSU 21); 
Raymond v. Maine Sch. Admin. Dist. 6, No. 2:18-cv-00379-JAW, 2019 WL 2110498 
(D. Me. May 14, 2019) (applying municipal liability concepts to MSAD 6).  
   Although section 1983 claims can be brought against municipalities, a local 
government entity such as, in this instance, the Great Salt Bay Community School 
Board, may be held liable “only where that [entity]’s policy or custom is responsible 

for causing the constitutional violation or injury.”  Abdisamad v. City of Lewiston, 
960 F.3d 56, 60 (1st Cir. 2020) (quoting Kelley v. LaForce, 288 F.3d 1, 9 (1st Cir. 
2002)); see Monell, 436 U.S. at 694.  In other words, “a [section] 1983 action brought 
against a municipality pursuant to [Monell] is proper only where the plaintiff pleads 
sufficient facts to indicate the existence of an official municipal policy or custom 
condoning the alleged constitutional violation.”  Ouellette v. Beaupre, 977 F.3d 127, 
140 (1st Cir. 2020).  The “policy or custom” requirement applies even where a plaintiff 

seeks declaratory or injunctive relief, as Lavigne does in part here.  Los Angeles Cnty. 
v. Humphries, 562 U.S. 29, 31 (2010).  Municipal bodies cannot be held liable under 
section 1983 for the acts of their employees on a respondeat superior theory.  Monell, 
436 U.S. at 691.  Rather, “a plaintiff who brings a section 1983 action against a 
municipality bears the burden of showing that, ‘through its deliberate conduct, the 
municipality was the “moving force” behind the injury alleged.’”  Haley, 657 F.3d at 

51 (quoting Bd. of Cnty. Comm’rs of Bryan Cnty. v. Brown, 520 U.S. 397, 404 (1997)). 
B.   The Challenged “Policy or Custom”                                    
   The  purported  municipal  “policy  or  custom”  that  Lavigne  challenges  is 
somewhat  nebulous.    The  School’s  written  “Transgender  Students  Guidelines” 
(“Guidelines”) are attached as an exhibit to the Complaint (ECF No. 1-6).5  The stated 

purposes of the Guidelines are (1) “[t]o foster a learning environment that is safe, and 
free  from  discrimination,  harassment  and  bullying;  and  [(2)  t]o  assist  in  the 
educational and social integration of transgender students in our school.”  ECF No. 
1-6 at 1.  The School Board emphasizes, and Lavigne does not dispute, that the 
Guidelines establish a procedure which calls for the participation of a transgender 
student’s parent(s) or guardian(s).6  See ECF No. 1-6 at 2 (“A plan should be developed 

by the school, in consultation with the student, parent(s)/guardian(s) and others as 
appropriate, to address the student’s particular needs.”).  The Complaint does not 
allege that the School Board or school officials violated the Guidelines. 
   Lavigne expressly confirms in her Opposition to the Motion to Dismiss that 
“the Guidelines are not the policy Plaintiff challenges.”7  ECF No. 16 at 8.  Instead, 

5  Also attached as an exhibit to the Complaint is the Great Salt Bay Community School District’s 
policy on “Staff Conduct with Students” (the “Conduct Policy”).  ECF No. 1-7 at 1.  Part of the Conduct 
Policy’s intent is to ensure that staff members and students have interactions “based upon mutual 
respect and trust.”  ECF No. 1-7 at 1.  Examples of “expressly prohibited” conduct by staff members 
include: “[a]sking a student to keep a secret” and, for “non-guidance/counseling staff, encouraging 
students to confide their personal or family problems and/or relationships.  If a student initiates such 
discussions, staff members are expected to be supportive but to refer the student to appropriate 
guidance/counseling staff for assistance.”  ECF No. 1-7 at 1.  The Complaint does not allege that the 
School Board or school officials violated the Conduct Policy.             
6  The Guidelines also acknowledge the role of parent(s)/guardian(s) in connection with the disclosure 
of information from a students’ records: “School staff should keep in mind that under FERPA, student 
records may only be accessed and disclosed to staff with a legitimate educational interest in the 
information.  Disclosures to others should only be made with appropriate authorization from the 
administration and/or parents/guardians.”  ECF No. 1-6 at 3.              
7  Lavigne’s concession that she does not challenge the Guidelines appears to be at odds with several 
statements in the Complaint, an inconsistency which suggests that Lavigne’s theory of the basis for 
Lavigne  asserts  that  her  alleged  injuries  have  been  caused  by  an  unwritten 
“Withholding Policy,” which she describes as “a systematic across-the-board practice 
which is not specified, but is hinted at, in the written ‘Guidelines.’”  ECF No. 16 at 8.  

She contends that the Guidelines “are supplements to the Withholding Policy, and in 
fact, permit the policy and practice of withholding/concealment.”  ECF No. 16 at 12 
(emphasis  omitted).    Lavigne  does  not  otherwise  address  or  explain  how  the 
Withholding Policy is hinted at in the Guidelines.                        
   In her Opposition to the Motion to Dismiss, Lavigne argues that the School 
Board’s unwritten Withholding Policy consists of “withholding and even concealing 

from parents information about actions the Defendants take with respect to children’s 
mental and physical wellbeing—information crucial to a child’s development, and 
which . . . any conscientious parent would desire to know.”  ECF No. 16 at 1.  She 
asserts  that  the  “Withholding  Policy  consists  of  a  regular  pattern,  custom,  and 
practice of withholding information from parents in situations where the Defendants 
believe  a  child  may  be  transgender—without  any  consideration  of  specific 
circumstances, or whether such withholding/concealment is warranted by particular 


are unconstitutional insofar as they provide for the concealment of, or do not mandate informing 
parents of, a decision to provide ‘gender-affirming’ care to a student.”  ECF No. 1 at 4, ¶ 11.  Lavigne 
also alleges in the Complaint that (1) the “Defendants contend that their actions with respect to all 
allegations herein were mandated by school board policies—specifically the [Guidelines] and the 
[Conduct Policy],” ECF No. 1 at 11, ¶ 48, and (2) the “School Board will continue to violate parents’ 
longstanding Fourteenth Amendment rights if it is not enjoined from continuing to enforce [the] 
Guidelines in the future,” ECF No. 1 at 18, ¶ 88.  To the extent that the Complaint includes allegations 
about the Guidelines that are contradicted by the attached exhibit, it is proper to rely on the text of 
the attachment.  Yacubian v. United States, 750 F.3d 100, 108 (1st Cir. 2014) (“[I]t is a well-settled 
rule that when a written instrument contradicts allegations in the complaint to which it is attached, 
the exhibit trumps the allegations.” (quoting Young v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., 717 F.3d 224, 229 n.1 
(1st Cir. 2013))).  In any event, Lavigne concedes that “the Guidelines are not the policy [she] 
challenges.”  ECF No. 16 at 8.  Thus, I do not consider the written policy as a possible basis for 
municipal liability.                                                      
facts about a child or parent.”  ECF No. 16 at 8-9.  The Withholding Policy, she 
contends,  “consists  of  actively  keeping  information  from  parents—and  even 
encouraging children to conceal information—about affirmative steps the school is 

taking with respect to a child’s psychosexual development.”  ECF No. 16 at 7.  Lavigne 
argues that the Withholding Policy, although unwritten, constitutes “a general rule 
governing  all  cases”  and  “an  across-the-board  practice  of  always  withholding 
information of this sort from parents.”  ECF No. 16 at 10-11.  The School Board 
disagrees, arguing that Lavigne cannot point to any written policy to substantiate 
her claims, and that the Complaint—although it alludes in a conclusory fashion to an 

unwritten policy of concealing information—fails to adequately plead that such a 
policy actually exists.                                                   
   The Complaint repeatedly alleges that the School has a “policy, pattern, and 
practice”  of  intentionally  withholding  and  concealing  certain  information  from 
parents.  See, e.g., ECF No. 1 at 2, 6-7, ¶¶ 4, 21, 27, 29.  But I do not credit these 
conclusory statements as adequately pleading that such a “policy or custom” exists.  
See Manning v. Bos. Med. Ctr. Corp., 725 F.3d 34, 43 (1st Cir. 2013) (“[C]onclusory 

allegations that merely parrot the relevant legal standard are disregarded, as they 
are  not  entitled  to  the  presumption  of  truth.”);  see  also  Massó-Torrellas  v. 
Municipality of Toa Alta, 845 F.3d 461, 469 (1st Cir. 2017) (affirming dismissal of a 
section  1983  claim  despite  complaint’s  assertion  that  the  “[m]unicipality 
implemented ‘customs and policies’ which caused the plaintiffs’ injuries”).  Instead, I 
read the Complaint as a whole, attachments included, and consider whether Lavigne 

has alleged sufficient non-conclusory facts to support a reasonable inference that the 
municipality is liable for the conduct that Lavigne challenges.  See García-Catalán, 
734 F.3d at 103.                                                          

C.   Applying Theories of Municipal Liability to Assess the Sufficiency of 
   Lavigne’s Complaint                                                  
   Lavigne’s Complaint implicates three possible theories of municipal liability: 
(1) unwritten policy or custom; (2) ratification by a final policymaker; and (3) failure 
to train.  I consider each theory in turn.                                
   1.   Municipal Liability Based on Unwritten Policy or Custom         
   Unwritten policies can give rise to municipal liability only where those policies 
are “so permanent and well settled as to constitute a custom or usage with the force 
of law.”  Abdisamad, 960 F.3d at 60 (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting 
Monell, 436 U.S. at 691).  “Put another way, a municipality can be held liable if an 

unlawful ‘custom or practice’ is ‘so well settled and widespread that the policymaking 
officials  of  the  municipality  can  be  said  to  have  either  actual  or  constructive 
knowledge of it yet did nothing to end the practice.’”  Baez v. Town of Brookline, 44 
F.4th  79,  82  (internal  quotation  marks  omitted)  (quoting  Whitfield  v. 
Meléndez-Rivera, 431 F.3d 1, 13 (1st Cir. 2005)).                         
   Here the Complaint, read as a whole and viewed in the light most favorable to 
the Plaintiff, does not plausibly establish that the alleged Withholding Policy is a 

settled custom or practice of the School or the School Board.  Paragraphs 20-28 of the 
Complaint8 set out the central facts concerning (1) Lavigne’s discovery of the chest 

8  Paragraphs 20-28 state:                                              
   20. On December 2, 2022, Plaintiff was assisting A.B. in cleaning A.B.’s room at home 
   when she discovered a chest binder—a device used to flatten a female’s chest so as to 
binders and that the chest binders were provided to A.B. by a social worker who “told 
A.B. that he was not going to tell A.B.’[s] parents about the chest binder[s], and A.B. 
need not do so either”; and (2) “that school officials had been calling A.B. by a name 

not on [A.B.’s] birth certificate and were referring to A.B. with gender-pronouns not 

   Great Salt Bay Community School and instructed A.B. on how to use it.  See photos 
   attached as Exhibit 1.                                               
   21. Plaintiff had never been informed before that A.B. had been given a chest binder 
   at the school or instructed about its use.  Plaintiff is informed and believes, and on that 
   basis alleges, that this was the result of the Great Salt Bay School’s blanket policy, 
   pattern, and practice of intentional withholding and concealment of such information 
   from all parents.                                                    
   22. Plaintiff is informed and believes, and on that basis alleges, that [the social worker] 
   gave A.B. the chest binder in his office and told A.B. that he was not going to tell 
   A.B.’[s] parents about the chest binder, and A.B. need not do so either. 
   23. Plaintiff is informed and believes, and on that basis alleges, that [the social worker] 
   gave A.B. a second chest binder at the same time.  See Exhibit 1.    
   24. Chest binders are not medical devices,  but  there are potential health risks 
   associated with the wearing of such binders, including difficulty breathing, back pain, 
   and numbness in the extremities.                                     
   25. Sexual identity, gender identification, and body image, particularly with respect to 
   such sexual characteristics as the female breast, are vitally important and intimate 
   psychological matters, central to an individual’s personality and self-image, and a 
   crucial element in how people relate to the world.  The significance of such matters is 
   even greater with respect to young people, particularly teenagers going through 
   puberty.  Consequently, any conscientious parent has a legitimate interest in knowing 
   information  respecting  his  or  her  child’s  sexual  and  psychological  maturation, 
   including but not limited to, the fact that the child is using a chest-binder, and/or is 
   being identified by names or pronouns not associated with that child’s birth sex. 
   26. After Plaintiff learned of the chest binder(s) on December 2, 2022, Plaintiff also 
   discovered that school officials had been calling A.B. by a name not on [A.B.’s] birth 
   certificate and were referring to A.B. with gender-pronouns not typically associated 
   with A.B.’s biological sex.  Plaintiff had never been informed of these facts. 
   27. Plaintiff is informed and believes, and on that basis alleges, that failure to inform 
   Plaintiff regarding the school’s use of certain pronouns when referring to A.B was the 
   result of the Great Salt Bay School’s blanket policy, pattern, and practice of intentional 
   withholding and concealment of such information from all parents.    
   28. Specifically, Plaintiff is informed and believes, and on that basis alleges, that [two 
   social workers] chose, at A.B[.]’s request, to use a different name and pronouns when 
   speaking to or about A.B., and that other officials at the school, including some 
   teachers, did so afterwards.  At no time, however, did any Defendant or any other 
   school official inform Plaintiff of these facts.                     
ECF No. 1 at 5-7, ¶¶ 20-28.                                               
typically associated with A.B.’s biological sex.”  ECF No. 1 at 6, ¶¶ 22, 26.  These 
allegations culminate with the following conclusion:                      

   Plaintiff  is  informed  and  believes,  and  on  that  basis  alleges,  that 
   Defendants withheld and concealed this information from her pursuant 
   to a blanket policy, pattern, and practice of withholding and concealing 
   information respecting “gender-affirming” treatment of minor children 
   from their parents.                                                  
ECF No. 1 at 7, ¶ 29.                                                     
   Assertions in a complaint “nominally cast in factual terms but so general and 
conclusory as to amount merely to an assertion that unspecified facts exist to conform 
to the legal blueprint” are insufficient to state a cognizable claim.  Menard v. CSX 
Transp., Inc., 698 F.3d 40, 45 (1st Cir. 2012).  Here, as I will explain, the Complaint’s 
assertion that there is a “blanket policy, pattern, and practice of withholding and 
concealing information respecting ‘gender-affirming’ treatment of minor children 
from their parents,” ECF No. 1 at 7, ¶ 29, states a conclusion unsupported by factual 
allegations that would plausibly establish the existence of a permanent and well-
settled custom.                                                           
   At  most,  the  Complaint  identifies  one  occasion  where  a  School  employee 
“actively withheld” information from a parent, ECF No. 16 at 8: when the social 
worker “told A.B. that he was not going to tell A.B.’[s] parents about the chest binder, 
and A.B. need not do so either,” ECF No. 1 at 6, ¶ 22.  The Complaint also alleges 
that school officials failed to alert Lavigne that some staff members had been using a 
different name and different pronouns at A.B.’s request.  Despite those allegations, 
there is no fact or set of facts alleged in the Complaint which support a reasonable 

inference that the challenged conduct related to A.B. was in keeping with a custom 
or practice of withholding information “so well settled and widespread that the 
policymaking  officials  of  the  municipality  can  be  said  to  have  either  actual  or 
constructive knowledge of it yet did nothing to end the practice.”  Baez, 44 F.4th at 

82 (quoting Whitfield, 431 F.3d at 13).  Indeed, the Complaint alleges that the 
principal  and  superintendent  “expressed  sympathy . . . and  concern  that  this 
information had been withheld and concealed from [Lavigne],” ECF No. 1 at 8, ¶ 33, 
undercutting the conclusion, required to sustain Lavigne’s claim under this theory, 
that withholding information from parents was a custom so widespread as to have 
the force of law.                                                         

   The Complaint frequently references the School Board’s “widespread custom” 
of making decisions without informing parents, including that “[t]he Great Salt Bay 
Community School Board’s official policy and widespread custom of making decisions 
for  students  without  informing  or  consulting  with  their  parents  established  an 
environment in which giving A.B. a chest binder and instructing A.B. on how to use 
a  chest  binder—without  consulting  Plaintiff,  and  afterwards  withholding  or 
concealing this information from Plaintiff—was not only allowed but considered 

standard practice for [the social worker who gave A.B. the chest binders].”  ECF No. 
1 at 14, ¶ 65; see also ECF No. 1 at 15-17, ¶¶ 72, 73, 75, 76, 80, 81.  But these 
conclusory statements are not supported by additional allegations that, if proven, 
would demonstrate the existence of a custom that could form a basis for municipal 
liability under Monell.  Because the Complaint fails to allege facts that, if proven, 
would  plausibly  demonstrate  that  the  challenged  actions  resulted  from  an 

unconstitutional  unwritten  custom,  Lavigne’s  municipal  liability  claims  cannot 
proceed  on  that  basis.    See  Abdisamad,  960  F.3d  at  60  (concluding  that  the 
complaint’s “factual allegations do not support a plausible inference that the City 
Defendants’ actions resulted from an unconstitutional policy or custom”). 

   2.   Municipal  Liability  Based  on  Ratification  by  a  Final     
        Policymaker                                                     
   Another means by which a plaintiff can satisfy Monell’s municipal “policy or 
custom” requirement is “by showing that ‘a person with final policymaking authority’ 
caused the alleged constitutional injury.”  Fincher v. Town of Brookline, 26 F.4th 479, 
485 (1st Cir. 2022) (quoting Rodríguez v. Municipality of San Juan, 659 F.3d 168, 181 
(1st Cir. 2011)).  “[A] single decision by a final policymaker can result in municipal 
liability.”  Welch v. Ciampa, 542 F.3d 927, 942 (1st Cir. 2008).  Whether a defendant 
is a municipal policymaker is a question of state law.  City of St. Louis v. Praprotnik, 
485 U.S. 112, 124 (1988); Walden v. City of Providence, 596 F.3d 38, 56 (1st Cir. 2010).  

One way to establish municipal liability is to show that a final municipal policymaker 
“approve[d] a subordinate’s decision and the basis for it.”  Praprotnik, 485 U.S. at 
127.  “Although Praprotnik does not define what constitutes ‘ratification,’ it draws a 
line between passive and active approval.”  Saunders v. Town of Hull, 874 F.3d 324, 
330 (1st Cir. 2017).                                                      
   Lavigne argues that the School Board ratified the actions of the two social 

workers  and  the  principal9  through  the  School  Board’s  January  statement  that 

9  I note that, although Lavigne argues that the School Board’s January statement constituted a “post 
hoc ratification of the actions” of the principal, ECF No. 1 at 10, ¶ 43, the Complaint’s only allegation 
about the principal’s actions prior to the January statement is that she met with Lavigne on or around 
December 5, 2022, after Lavigne discovered the chest binder, and “expressed sympathy with Plaintiff, 
and concern that this information had been withheld and concealed from her,” ECF No. 1 at 8, ¶ 33. 
neither it “nor school administration are aware of any violation of policy or law which 
requires further action at this time.”  ECF No. 1 at 10, ¶ 42 (quoting ECF No. 1-4 at 
1); see ECF No. 1 at 10, ¶ 43.  In support of her ratification theory, Lavigne also points 

to the Complaint’s assertion that “[the superintendent] in a subsequent meeting with 
Plaintiff explained that no policy had been violated by the giving of chest binders to 
A.B., or by school officials (specifically [the two social workers]) employing a different 
name and pronouns with respect to A.B., without informing Plaintiff.”10  ECF No. 1 
at 8, ¶ 34.  In response, the School Board argues that because “there is no allegation 
that the Great Salt Bay School Board had any knowledge of a policy violation,” no 

ratification occurred.  ECF No. 17 at 7.                                  
   The superintendent’s alleged statement that no policy had been violated does 
not itself constitute an actionable policy from which municipal liability might flow 
because  there  are  no  facts  pleaded  in  the  Complaint  which  suggest  that  the 
superintendent possessed final policy-making authority for the municipality.11  “A 
single decision by a municipal policymaker constitutes official policy ‘only where the 
decisionmaker possesses final authority to establish municipal policy with respect to 

the action ordered.’”  Freeman v. Town of Hudson, 714 F.3d 29, 38 (1st Cir. 2013) 
(quoting Pembaur v. City of Cincinnati, 475 U.S. 469, 481 (1986)); see also Craig v. 

10  Lavigne contends that ratification is also shown by the School Board’s eventual approval of a 
second-year probationary contract for the social worker who provided the chest binders to A.B.  That 
allegation is not contained in the Complaint; Lavigne explains that the approval occurred after the 
initiation of this action.  Even if that fact was alleged in the Complaint, it would not—in isolation or 
taken together with the other facts alleged—support a reasonable inference that the School Board 
affirmatively endorsed the particular conduct that Lavigne challenges in a manner that would support 
municipal liability.                                                      
11  Indeed, the Complaint describes the superintendent’s role as ensuring that the School complies 
with School Board policies and state laws.                                
Maine Sch. Admin. Dist. No. 5, 350 F.Supp.2d 294, 297-98 & n.2 (D. Me. 2004) 
(granting  motion  to  dismiss  where  complaint  failed  to  plausibly  allege  that 
superintendent  “had  policymaking  authority”  or  that  the  municipal  entity 

“specifically  delegated  its  policymaking  functions  to”  the  superintendent); 
Praprotnik, 485 U.S. at 126 (“If the mere exercise of discretion by an employee could 
give  rise  to  a  constitutional  violation,  the  result  would  be  indistinguishable 
from respondeat superior liability.”).  Further, the School Board’s written statement 
that neither it nor school administrators were aware of a violation of policy or law—
without identifying any particular decision or decisions of a subordinate—does not, 

without  more,  plausibly  show  that  the  School  Board  “active[ly]  approv[ed],” 
Saunders, 874 F.3d at 330, of “a subordinate’s decision and the basis for it” such that 
municipal liability could follow, Praprotnik, 485 U.S. at 127.  The single alleged 
incident of a School staff member “actively with[olding]” information, together with 
the School Board’s vague expression more than one month later12 that it was not 
aware of any violation of law or policy, do not, either separately or in combination 
with other facts alleged in the Complaint, establish a de facto municipal policy from 

which Monell liability may arise.                                         
   3.   Municipal Liability Based on Failure to Train                   
   Lavigne  finally  argues  that  even  if  the  School  Board  does  not  have  a 
Withholding Policy, its failure to train the School’s employees that the withholding of 
important information—such as a student’s use of chest binders and adoption of a 

12  The School Board also issued the statement a full month after Lavigne spoke at the School Board 
meeting, and after issuing a separate written statement soon after Lavigne addressed the School 
Board.                                                                    
new name and gender pronouns—from the student’s parents represents a failure to 
train on which Monell liability may be based.                             
   Under some limited circumstances, a municipality may be liable under section 

1983  for  “constitutional  violations  resulting  from  its  failure  to  train  municipal 
employees.”  City of Canton v. Harris, 489 U.S. 378, 380 (1989).  However, the 
municipality is liable only if its failure to train constitutes “deliberate indifference to 
the constitutional rights of its inhabitants.”  Id. at 392; see also Haley, 657 F.3d at 52 
(“Triggering municipal liability on a claim of failure to train requires a showing that 
municipal decisionmakers either knew or should have known that training was 

inadequate but nonetheless exhibited deliberate indifference to the unconstitutional 
effects of those inadequacies.”).  A plaintiff does not state a claim for municipal 
liability  by  pleading  “mere  insufficiency  of  a  municipality’s  training  program.”  
Marrero-Rodríguez v. Municipality of San Juan, 677 F.3d 497, 503 (1st Cir. 2012). 
   “Deliberate indifference is a stringent standard of fault,” and, to prevail on 
such  a  claim,  a  plaintiff  must  ultimately  show  “proof  that  a  municipal  actor 
disregarded a known or obvious consequence of his action.”  Connick v. Thompson, 

563 U.S. 51, 61 (2011) (alteration and internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting 
Brown, 520 U.S. at 410).  “[A] training program must be quite deficient in order for 
the deliberate indifference standard to be met: the fact that training is imperfect or 
not in the precise form a plaintiff would prefer is insufficient to make such a showing.”  
Young, 404 F.3d at 27.  “A pattern of similar constitutional violations by untrained 
employees  is  ‘ordinarily  necessary’  to  demonstrate  deliberate  indifference  for 

purposes of failure to train.”  Connick, 563 U.S. at 62 (quoting Brown, 520 U.S. at 
409).  However, a plaintiff may not be required to establish a pattern if the need to 
train municipal officers on constitutional limitations is “so obvious” as to support a 
finding of deliberate indifference.  Canton, 489 U.S. at 390 & n.10.      

   Lavigne argues that the School Board did not properly train school officials 
“about parental rights in the gender identity context” after adopting the Transgender 
Students Guidelines, including in situations where a student requests to be called by 
a particular name or pronouns, or where staff members provide chest binders to 
students.  ECF No. 1 at 17, ¶ 79.  However, the Complaint does not assert any facts 
about the actual training that school officials did or did not receive.  The Complaint 

is devoid of alleged facts which could plausibly show a pattern of constitutional 
violations by untrained staff members, or that the need to train staff members on 
“parental rights in the gender identity context” was so obvious as to support a finding 
of deliberate indifference.  ECF No. 1 at 17, ¶ 79.  Lavigne’s conclusory assertions to 
the contrary are not sufficient to plead deliberate indifference and, therefore, her 
claims do not withstand the School Board’s motion to dismiss.             

D.   Conclusion Regarding Municipal Liability                             
     It is understandable that a parent, such as Lavigne, might expect school 
officials to keep her informed about how her child is navigating matters related to 
gender identity at school.  Her Complaint, however, fails to plead facts which would, 
if proven, establish municipal liability under Monell and its progeny based on an 
unwritten custom, ratification by a final policymaker, or failure to train.  The School 
Board’s  Motion  to  Dismiss  is,  therefore,  granted  as  to  all  counts,  and  I  do  not 

separately address the School Board’s additional arguments that the Complaint fails 
to plead facts from which any violation of Lavigne’s substantive or procedural due 
process rights could be found.13                                          

                      IV.  CONCLUSION                                   
   It is accordingly ORDERED that the Motion to Dismiss for Failure to State a 
Claim (ECF No. 12) is GRANTED and the Complaint (ECF No. 1) is DISMISSED. 
   SO ORDERED.                                                          
   Dated:  May 3, 2024                                                  


                                            /s/ JON D. LEVY             
                                      U.S. DISTRICT JUDGE               











13   My conclusion  as to  municipal liability  applies  to  all four counts, which encompass both 
substantive  due  process  and  procedural  due  process  claims  premised  on  the  same  purported 
“Withholding Policy.”  See, e.g., Abdisamad, 960 F.3d at 60-61 (applying municipal liability concepts 
to conclude that plaintiff’s substantive due process claim against city was properly dismissed); Bernard 
v. Town of Lebanon, No. 2:16-cv-00042-JAW, 2017 WL 1232406, at *6 (D. Me. Apr. 3, 2017) (citing 
municipal liability concepts as one basis for concluding that plaintiff had failed to state a claim against 
town for violation of procedural due process rights); accord Oden, LLC v. City of Rome, 707 F. App’x 
584, 586 (11th Cir. 2017) (“Procedural due process claims brought under [section] 1983 are subject to 
limitations on municipal liability.”).