U.S. DISTRIc 
                                                              OISTRICY  OF □□□□□□ 
                                                                       LED 
                     UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT       aan  pris 
                                  FOR THE                    2004 JUN  10  Ps  3:42 
                          DISTRICT OF VERMONT                   ote © 
                                                            B Y A te ee     □□□ □□□ □□□□ 
ANDREW LEISE,                                )                               □□ 
                                            ) 
     Plaintiff,                             ) 
                                            ) 
           V.                               )      Case No. 2:22-cv-00009 
                                            ) 
VERMONT HUMAN RIGHTS                         ) 
COMMISSION, KEVIN CHRISTIE, BOR              ) 
YANG, DA CAPO PUBLISHING, INC., and) 
JOHN AND JANE DOE I-X,                       ) 
                                            ) 
     Defendants.                            ) 
   OPINION AND ORDER GRANTING IN PART AND DENYING IN PART 
LEAVE TO AMEND FOR PLAINTIFF’S PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE 
   SUPPLEMENTAL FIRST AMENDED COMPLAINT, GRANTING VHRC 
  DEFENDANTS’ PARTIAL MOTION TO DISMISS, AND DENYING VHRC 
     DEFENDANTS’ REQUEST FOR PARTIAL RULE 54(B) JUDGMENT 
                                 (Doc. 109) 
     Plaintiff Andrew Leise, a Vermont State Police (“VSP”) trooper, brings this action 
against Defendants Bor Yang, former Executive Director of Vermont Human Rights 
Commission (“VHRC”), and Kevin Christie, Chairman of VHRC, in their personal 
capacities (collectively, “VHRC Defendants”), as well as John and Jane Doe I-X, the 
“individual actor(s) [who] carried out the actions of [VJHRC and Seven Days[.]”! (Doc. 
106 at 8, J 18.) 
     Plaintiff's claims arise from VHRC’s November 2020 determination that there 
were reasonable grounds to find that VSP discriminated against Lydia Clemmons, Ph.D., 
based on her race and gender. Plaintiff claims VHRC’s determination (the “Final 
Determination”), its wrongful release of a confidential investigative report (the 
“Investigative Report”), and Seven Days’ subsequent reporting about the same falsely 
portrayed him as racist and sexist. In his proposed Second Amended Complaint (the 
' Seven Days is a newspaper published by Da Capo Publishing, Inc. 

“PSAC”), he asserts six causes of action: (1) a procedural due process claim (liberty 
interest/stigma plus) under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (Count I); (2) a procedural due process 
claim (property interest/constructive termination) under §  1983 (Count II); (3) a 
substantive due process claim for arbitrary and oppressive government action under 
§ 1983 (Count IID); (4) an invasion of privacy claim under Vermont law (Count IV); (5) a 
defamation claim under Vermont law (Count V); and (6) a  tortious interference with 
contract claim under Vermont law (Count VI). 
     Plaintiff is represented by Kaveh S. Shahi, Esq. VHRC Defendants are represented 
by Lisa B. Shelkrot, Esq. 
I.     Procedural Background. 
     On March 24, 2023, the court issued an Opinion and Order granting in part and 
denying in part VHRC Defendants’ April 1, 2022 motion to dismiss pursuant to Fed. R. 
Civ. P. 12(b)(6). (Doc. 66.) The Opinion and Order dismissed all Plaintiff's claims 
against VHRC Defendants except for his 42 U.S.C. § 1983 claims (Counts I, II, and II) 
and invasion of privacy and defamation claims (Counts IV and V) asserted against 
VHRC Defendants in their individual capacities, to the extent these claims relate to the 
allegedly wrongful release of the Investigative Report to Seven Days. The court also 
dismissed Seven Days and VHRC as defendants, and all claims against VHRC 
Defendants in their official capacities. The court deferred ruling on whether VHRC 
Defendants were entitled to qualified immunity on the §  1983 claims until the 
development of a factual record, a decision from which VHRC Defendants filed an 
interlocutory appeal. 
     Thereafter, on June 29, 2023, the court granted in part and denied in part VHRC 
Defendants’ motion for reconsideration. (Doc. 90.) It dismissed without prejudice 
Plaintiff's 42 U.S.C. § 1983 procedural due process liberty and property claims (Counts I 
and II) as to VHRC Defendants in their individual capacities but did not dismiss 
Plaintiff's § 1983 substantive due process claim (Count III). Pursuant to this ruling, 
VHRC Defendants’ appeal was narrowed to the question of qualified immunity regarding 
Count III. On August 10, 2023, the court denied without prejudice partial final judgment

for Seven Days and granted partial final judgment in favor of VHRC under Rule 54. 
(Doc. 95.) 
     Plaintiff moved for leave to file a second amended complaint on July 13, 2023, 
(Doc. 92), which the court denied without prejudice on August 28, 2023 because of 
VHRC Defendants’ pending interlocutory appeal. (Doc. 99.) In a hearing on September 
19, 2023, the court indicated that it would consider the pending motions to dismiss in the 
context of an amended complaint. (Doc. 102.) The Second Circuit issued a limited 
remand on Plaintiff's motion for leave to amend on September 27, 2023. On October 17, 
2023, the court conditionally granted the motion and stated that it would “consider 
Defendants’ arguments that any amendments are futile in the context of their anticipated 
motions to dismiss.” (Doc. 105.) 
     On October 18, 2023, Plaintiff filed the PSAC. (Doc. 106.) Thereafter, on 
November 9, 2023, VHRC Defendants moved to dismiss Counts I and II for failure to 
state a claim under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6), (Doc. 109), and Plaintiff responded in 
opposition on November 27, 2023. (Doc. 110.) After VHRC Defendants filed a reply on 
December 11, 2023, and requested final judgment in their favor pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. 
P. 54, the court took the pending motion under advisement. (Doc.  114.) 
     The court considers the conditionally granted motion for leave to amend and 
motion to dismiss in tandem. See Nolan v. County of Erie, 2021 WL 51004, at *4 
(W.D.N.Y. Jan. 6, 2021) (“There is nothing that bars [d]efendants from moving to 
dismiss while a court decides a pending motion for leave to amend.”); Phillips v. Orleans 
County, 2019 WL 3088051, at *4 (W.D.N.Y. July 15, 2019) (explaining that 
consideration of both motions simultaneously will allow the court to “determine whether 
the amendments would be futile and at the same time consider whether a claim should be 
dismissed”). 
II.    The PSAC’s Factual Allegations. 
     Many of the PSAC’s factual allegations remain virtually unchanged, and thus the 
court adopts its prior summary of those allegations as set forth herein. New allegations 
set forth in paragraphs 139 through 146 of the PSAC are addressed separately.

     A.     The Disputes at Clemmons Family Farm. 
     Plaintiff is  a VSP corporal based at the VSP’s Williston Barracks. In the fall of 
2017, he was one of the VSP troopers who responded to incidents at Clemmons Family 
Farm in Charlotte, Vermont. 
     Dr. Clemmons, an African-American woman, is the owner and operator of 
Clemmons Family Farm, a 148-acre farm that hosts classes and events. In September 
2017, Dr. Clemmons reported to VSP that her tenant Greg Barreda, a Hispanic male, had 
paid a security deposit in silver coins, which Dr. Clemmons suspected were stolen. Mr. 
Barreda was arrested and charged in Vermont Superior Court with the theft of the coins. 
On September 22, 2017, Mr. Barreda was released on conditions which initially did not 
prohibit him from returning to the Clemmons Family Farm but were subsequently 
amended to require him to stay three hundred feet from Dr. Clemmons. 
     Between October 2017 and December 2017, VSP responded to Clemmons Family 
Farm more than ten times to address conflicts between Dr. Clemmons and Mr. Barreda 
regarding the latter’s truck, dogs, possessions, firearms, alleged violations of his 
conditions of release, and alleged trespasses. As a result, Mr. Barreda was charged with 
four violations of his conditions of release and one count of unlawful trespass. Plaintiff 
responded to complaints by both Dr. Clemmons and Mr. Barreda and “attempted to 
address the parties in a fair and reasonable manner while controlling the risk of 
aggravation and escalation between the parties and maintaining his own safety.” (Doc. 
106 at 14,  | 38.) 
     On November 15, 2017, Mr. Barreda was granted “a temporary stalking order” 
against Dr. Clemmons in Vermont Superior Court. Jd. at 22, § 59. On that same day, 
Plaintiff and a VSP sergeant served Dr. Clemmons with the stalking order at Clemmons 
Family Farm. On November 27, 2017, the stalking order was vacated. Dr. Clemmons was 
granted a temporary restraining order against Mr. Barreda on December 14, 2017, which 
Plaintiff served on Mr. Barreda five days later. On December 28, 2017, Mr. Barreda was 
evicted from Clemmons Family Farm pursuant to  a Vermont Superior Court order. 
     Dr. Clemmons filed a written complaint with VSP Internal Affairs on December

21, 2017 to request the removal of Plaintiff and another officer from her case because of 
their alleged racial bias. She thereafter filed  a complaint in early 2018 with VHRC 
against VSP and the Vermont Department of Public Safety for denial of “services, 
facilities, goods, privileges, advantages, benefits, or accommodations” on the basis of her 
race, color, and sex in violation of 9 V.S.A. § 4502(c). 
     B.     VHRC’s Investigation. 
     VHRC Investigator Nelson M. Campbell, Esq. spent approximately three years 
investigating Dr. Clemmons’ discrimination complaint. In the course of her investigation, 
Investigator Campbell reviewed “documents, court filings, bodycam recordings of 
troopers’ words and actions in interactions with Dr. Clemmons, internal emails, and other 
witness testimony[.]” (Doc. 12-2 at 20.) 
     Plaintiff alleges that on July 16, 2020, Investigator Campbell provided a draft 
report to the parties which concluded there was insufficient evidence to show VSP 
discriminated against Dr. Clemmons on the basis of sex or race because VSP’s treatment 
was not “markedly hostile” and because there was a  lack of a racial “comparator” of “a 
white individual or family in similar circumstances, who was delivered services by the 
VSP in a more favorable way than [Dr. Clemmons’] family.” (Doc.  106 at 35-36, 4 93- 
95) (internal quotation marks omitted). Investigator Campbell allegedly stated that Mr. 
Barreda was a comparator for purposes of the sex discrimination claims and was treated 
less favorably than Dr. Clemmons. 
     C.     The Investigative Report. 
     On November 10, 2020, Ms. Yang approved the final version of the Investigative 
Report, which Plaintiff contends VHRC “manipulated and falsified” to “reverse the 
conclusions and generate an investigative report that recommended a  finding of 
discrimination.” /d. at 2,  □ 3. VHRC allegedly sought “‘to politically promote itself as 
aligned with national movements such as Black Lives Matter[,]” id.  4 2, and “exploit[ed] 
Dr. Clemmons’ race [to] score politically against VSP as a representative of the ‘white’ 
law enforcement.” Jd. at 5,  | 9. VHRC members were allegedly “induced” by the 
Investigative Report to find reasonable grounds to conclude VSP discriminated against

Dr. Clemmons. /d. at 2,   3. 
     The 105-page Investigative Report details interactions between VSP, Dr. 
Clemmons, and Mr. Barreda between September and December 2017. It includes two 
exhibits:  a photograph of the Clemmons Family Farm property and a color-coded table of 
the calls that Dr. Clemmons and Mr. Barreda made to VSP. Applying the burden-shifting 
framework set forth in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973), the 
Investigative Report concludes that Dr. Clemmons established a prima facie case of 
discrimination. Although it finds VSP’s asserted legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons 
for its actions “persuasive on their face,” which “initially swayed the investigation 
towards making a no reasonable grounds recommendation[,]” after analyzing evidence of 
pretext, the Investigative Report ultimately concludes that “VSP’s reasons were 
illegitimate.” (Doc.  12-2 at 85.) 
     The Investigative Report’s pretext analysis includes numerous references to 
Plaintiff and states that Plaintiff “denigrated Dr. Clemmons to Barreda and disparaged 
her, telling him he would cover for him and that she was unreasonable. He then 
characterized her as dishonest on perhaps the most ridiculous basis imaginable—her 
guests were late on a Sunday morning to their location—rural Charlotte.” Jd. at 88. A 
subsection entitled “Continuous preferential treatment of Barreda by [Plaintiff]” states: 
     [Plaintiff's] treatment of Dr. Clemmons and Josh Clemmons on October 22 
     and beyond, in contrast to his treatment of Barreda, is a significant example 
     of disparate treatment based on race, color, and sex. [Plaintiff s] rudeness, 
     accusatory attitude[,] and his dismissiveness of the Clemmons[es]’ 
     concerns, even though he had never met them before, strongly suggest that 
     [Plaintiff] either already had an unfavorable opinion about Dr. Clemmons 
     prior to his arrival, or that he formed one upon seeing her and her brother. 
Id. at 93 (emphasis in original). 
     Citing an undated “linguistical analysis of [Plaintiff's] interaction with the 
Clemmons[es] on October 22, 2017[]” by Maeve Eberhardt, an associate professor at the 
University of Vermont, which was “requested” by Dr. Clemmons, the Investigative 
Report quotes Dr. Eberhardt as follows: “Empirical studies of interactions between police 
officers and citizens show systematic differential treatment of African Americans and

Whites, and this pattern is replicated here as well.” Jd. The analysis notes Mr. Barreda 
“presents as White” and Dr. Clemmons “presents as African American[.]” Id. 
     Finding that “[Plaintiff] frequently expressed concern for Barreda’s welfare, but 
never the welfare of the Clemmons[es]” and had a  “dismissive attitude toward complaints 
from women,” id. at 94-95, the Investigative Report concludes that “[Plaintiff s] 
treatment of Barreda and his treatment of both Clemmons[es], particularly Dr. 
Clemmons, is not evidence of professional conduct—it is evidence of pretext and it is 
proof of discrimination against Dr. Clemmons on the basis of race, color, and sex.” (Doc. 
12-2 at 95) (emphasis in original). 
     Acknowledging that her “own perspective shifted over almost three years as the 
evidence kept coming in[,]” id. at 102, Investigator Campbell cites Plaintiff's 
“disparaging, sexually discriminatory[,] and highly inappropriate conversation with 
Barreda about Dr. Clemmons[]” as “result[ing] in a reassessment of the issue of whether 
the VSP intended to provide quality policing services for the Clemmonsfes] and raised 
the very credible possibility of discrimination by [Plaintiff] based on sex, race[,] and 
color.” /d. at 100 (emphasis in original). Investigator Campbell concluded that Plaintiff 
had “internalized” VSP’s “highly negative” views of Dr. Clemmons “before he arrived[]” 
at Clemmons Family Farm for the first time. Jd. 
     D.     The Final Determination. 
     VHRC’s four-page Final Determination records two March 25, 2021 votes of 
VHRC’s members. The members, chaired by Mr. Christie, voted unanimously, with one 
abstention, in favor of finding reasonable grounds to believe that VSP and the Vermont 
Department of Public Safety illegally discriminated against Dr. Clemmons on the basis of 
(1) race and color and (2) sex, in violation of Vermont law. 
     Plaintiff alleges that he is not racist or sexist and that his conduct reflected 
“exemplary law enforcement.” (Doc. 106 at 16, § 42.) In every encounter with Dr. 
Clemmons, he contends he “acted professionally and fairly in the best tradition of law 
enforcement.” Jd. at 41,  | 104. Plaintiffs PSAC includes a  chart identifying thirteen 
allegedly false statements in the Investigative Report. Jd. at 16-18, § 43.

     E.     Release of Documents to Seven Days. 
     Plaintiff alleges that while the Final Determination is a public document, the 
Investigative Report is not and was “unlawfully released” in violation of 9 V.S.A. § 4555 
to Seven Days on June 10, 2021 “in exchange for favorable media coverage.” Jd. at 2, 
4, 4. He avers “[VJHRC in an executive session discussed and approved the release of the 
Investigative Report upon request.” Jd. at 47,  J 115. Thereafter, VHRC Defendants 
allegedly had an “arrangement” whereby Seven Days would “promote [V]HRC’s 
leadership, shape public opinion against VSP and its troopers, and eliminate scrutiny of 
the Investigative Report which would have been part of the due process right of the 
troopers to defend their good names.” /d. at 3, 4 5. “Consistent with this scheme, on June 
23, 2021, Seven Days published an article . . . entitled, ‘Vermont State Police 
Discriminated Against Black Woman Who Runs Clemmons Family Farm, Commission 
Says’” (the “June 23 Article”). (Doc. 106 at 3, 4 5.) 
     The June 23 Article acknowledges that the Final Determination and Investigative 
Report were “unpublished” and were not available on VHRC’s website. (Doc. 12-1 at 2.) 
Seven Days requested the Investigative Report on June 10, 2021, and VHRC “staff 
emailed it that day.” Jd. at 3. The June 23 Article notes: 
     Bor Yang, executive director of the commission, acknowledged in an email 
     that reports become public documents when the commission determines 
     reasonable grounds exist to believe discrimination occurred. 
     “That report is made available to the public upon request but there is no 
     obligation on the [V]JHRC’s part to post anything on our website or to 
     otherwise announce the decision,” she wrote. “A decision was made to not 
     post this report on our website but to make it available upon request. The 
     basis for that decision was discussed in executive session.” 
     From the time the determination was made in March, Yang wrote, the 
     commission has six months to attempt to negotiate a legal settlement with 
     the state police. If one is not reached, the commission has the option to sue 
     on Clemmons[es]’ and the public’s behalf. 
     “We are still in the negotiations phase and so I will not be providing further 
     comment on the case,” she wrote. 
Td.

     The following paragraphs of the June 23 Article identify Plaintiff by name: 
     State police Cpl. Andrew Leise arrived. In under a minute, according to the 
     report, he accused Clemmons of nullifying the court-ordered conditions of 
     release by “coming to her place of business and being within 300 feet of 
     Barreda, despite the fact that she was under no legal restraint that prohibited 
     her from coming to her place of business.” 
     Investigator Campbell reviewed dashcam and bodycam footage. She wrote 
     that Leise’s initial tone toward Clemmons and her brother was “alternately 
     impatient, brusque, accusatory and confrontational peppered with 
     occasional perfunctory politeness.” 
     Leise stayed for an hour and helped Barreda move his belongings. He also 
     “coached Barreda about what to put in his statement” to police, the report 
     says, and thanked him for being a “gentleman.” Leise later informed the 
     Williston barracks in an email that, because Clemmons’ guests began 
     arriving a half hour later than she said they were due, he doubted her 
     honesty. 
Id. at 5. Seven Days provided a  link to the Final Determination and Investigative Report 
beneath a heading that stated: “Read the full report below[.]” Jd. at 7. 
     The June 23 Article notes Vermont Public Safety Commissioner Michael Schirling 
characterized Plaintiff's conduct as a “de-escalat[ion]” technique and criticized the 
Investigative Report for taking “significant liberties with the facts to interpret them in the 
light least favorable to the responding troopers in an unfair way[.]” Jd. at 3, 5 (internal 
quotation marks omitted). The June 23 Article quotes Ms. Yang as saying that it is “not 
unusual for a staff attorney to sway back and forth as they consider new and evolving 
evidence in a case.” (Doc. 12-1 at 3) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
     Plaintiff alleges that Seven Days “focused only on [him]” despite the dozens of 
VSP troopers involved and “falsely highlighted [his] conduct as racist.” (Doc. 106 at 57, 
 129.) The PSAC identifies twenty-two alleged misrepresentations or omissions in the 
June 23 Article that “presented [P]laintiff's involvement in a false and misleading 
light[,]” id. at 57-60, { 130, and lists seventeen “omissions and representations” and 
eighteen ways Seven Days attempted to “spin the story[.]” Jd. at 51-56, 9§ 124-25. 
     He claims that on July 28, 2021, VHRC through Mr. Christie “declined to meet 
with [him] to discuss with him the restoration of his reputation[,] . .  . thereby

reaffirm[ing] [VHRC’s] malice and ill-will toward [P]laintiff, and depriv[ing] [him] of 
the opportunity for a post-deprivation name-clearing.” Id. at 67, J 147. 
     F.     Plaintiff's Alleged Damages. 
     Plaintiff alleges that his “personal and professional reputation has been seriously 
damaged] and his career in law enforcement has practically ended as a  result of 
[D]efendants’ conduct[.]” Jd. at 42,  | 106. He asserts that he “has been unable to return to 
work as a VSP trooper[,]” id. at 61, § 134, but concedes he is still employed by VSP. He 
alleges that this is “tantamount to [his] constructive discharge as any reasonable law 
enforcement officer in his position would find it intolerable to continue to work as a 
trooper.” (Doc. 106 at 61-62, § 134.) He alleges he has “suffered a loss of income” and 
“has been seeking employment in positions that do not involve his engagement with the 
public while wearing a VSP uniform[,]” which offer “lower pay and benefits, and are less 
prestigious.” Jd. at 62, § 134. He claims University of Vermont Medical Center 
(““UVMMC’”’) refused to hire him as a security guard because of Defendants’ false 
characterization of him as a  “racist.” Jd. at 6, § 11. 
     Plaintiff seeks compensatory damages “‘for loss of income for the balance of the 
career he would have enjoyed with VSP until retirement[]’”; “garden variety” emotional 
damages for “upset, humiliation, embarrassment[,] and damage to his good name[]”; 
nominal damages “for the violation of his constitutional rights[]”; attorney’s fees, 
interest, and costs; and punitive damages. Jd. at 68,   150 (internal quotation marks 
omitted). 
     G.    The PSAC’s Additional Facts and Law. 
     Plaintiff alleges VHRC Defendants had the power to provide process to him prior 
to allegedly falsely characterizing him as a racist because they oversaw VHRC’s 
investigation. He further contends VHRC Defendants were required to provide him a 
hearing or meeting before the public release of the Investigative Report. See 9 V.S.A. 
§ 4552(b)(1). 
     Ms. Yang, as VHRC’s Executive Director, was responsible for “oversee[ing] the 
day-to-day operations of the agency and its staff[.]” Vt. Admin Code § 11-1-1, § 1(e). 
                                     10 

She was allegedly “intimately involved” with the drafting of the Investigative Report. 
(Doc. 106 at 64, § 140.) Mr. Christie, as VHRC’s Chair, was allegedly responsible for 
overseeing the investigation. Plaintiff cites the following statutory duty: 
     If the Commission finds reasonable grounds to believe that unlawful 
     discrimination has occurred, but does not find an emergency, it shall make 
     every reasonable effort to eliminate the discrimination by informal means 
     such as conference, conciliation, and persuasion. If the case is disposed of 
     by informal means in a manner satisfactory to a majority of the 
     Commission, it shall dismiss the proceeding. If the case is not disposed of 
     by informal means in a manner satisfactory to a majority of the 
     Commission within six months, it shall either bring an action in Superior 
     Court as provided in section 4553 of this title or dismiss the proceedings, 
     unless an extension is necessary to complete ongoing good faith 
     negotiations and all parties consent to the extension. 
9 V.S.A. § 4554(e) (emphasis supplied). Plaintiff claims this duty “is mandatory, broadly 
stated, and not limited to engagement with only the respondent party[,]” and “[s]uch a 
review is contemplated by the statute to take place before the matter goes to court and 
litigation.” (Doc. 106 at 65, □□ 142-43.) 
     Because VHRC found reasonable grounds for discrimination and the Investigative 
Report found Plaintiff had discriminated, Plaintiff asserts VHRC Defendants were 
required to meet with Plaintiff about their findings and engage in a “conference, 
conciliation, and persuasion” process that would have provided a name-clearing 
opportunity. At that name-clearing hearing, Plaintiff could have used the affidavits of 
Joshua and Laura Clemmons to persuade VHRC Defendants that the racism allegations 
made by Dr. Clemmons were not credible. 
     VHRC Defendants were allegedly “directed involved” in the release of the 
Investigative Report to Seven Days and later defended their actions in the June 23 
Article. (Doc.  106 at 66, { 143.) Plaintiff asserts that the release was part of a “political 
ploy and self-promotion scheme” to gain favorable publicity and influence public opinion 
“to undermine the due process rights of law enforcement personnel implicated as racists.” 
Id. 
     Plaintiff clams VHRC Rules “anticipate” a meeting or hearing “for witnesses to 

                                     11 

show good cause to the Executive Director to protect their identities.” Jd. J 144. He 
contends that, “[a]t  a minimum,” this would have protected Plaintiff's and other VSP 
troopers’ identities. Jd. 
     VHRC Rule 33 provides in part: “The identities of non-party witnesses may be 
revealed as part of the investigative file upon request unless the executive director has 
determined that there is good cause to protect the witnesses’ identities.” Vt. Admin Code 
§ 11-1-1,  § 33 (“VHRC Rule 33”). This good cause determination allegedly “would entail 
a properly noticed hearing[,] as VHRC is required under 9 V.S.A. §[ ]4553(c) to comply 
with 3 V.S.A. chapter 25[,]” which has procedural requirements delineated in 3 V.S.A. 
§ 809. (Doc. 106 at 66,   145.) Plaintiff asserts that “[t]he tremendous reputational and 
career damage to law enforcement officers from the release of their identities” in the 
Investigative Report without due process and its racist behavior accusation was good 
cause for identity protection. Jd. 
     Although Plaintiff alleges that due process required a pre-deprivation hearing, he 
concedes that “a post[-]deprivation hearing or meeting could have mitigated [the] harm” 
with “a public retraction and apology to help restore [his] reputation and the ability to 
remain employed as a trooper.” Jd. at 67, ¥ 146. 
Ill.    VHRC Defendants’ Partial Motion to Dismiss the PSAC. 
     A.     Standard of Review. 
     A plaintiff may amend a complaint only “with the opposing party’s written 
consent or the court’s leave.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(a)(2). “The court should freely give 
leave [to amend] when justice so requires[,]” id., but “[l]Jeave may be denied ‘for good 
reason, including futility, bad faith, undue delay, or undue prejudice to the opposing 
party.’” TechnoMarine SA v. Gifiports, Inc., 758 F.3d 493, 505 (2d Cir. 2014) (quoting 
McCarthy v. Dun & Bradstreet Corp., 482 F.3d 184, 200 (2d Cir. 2007)). “A proposed 
amendment to a complaint is futile when it ‘could not withstand a motion to dismiss.’” 
Balintulo v. Ford Motor Co., 796 F.3d 160, 164-65 (2d Cir. 2015) (quoting Lucente v. 
IBM Corp., 310 F.3d 243, 258 (2d Cir. 2002)). 

                                     12 

     To survive a motion to dismiss filed pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P.  12(b)(6), “a 
complaint must contain sufficient factual matter, accepted as true, to ‘state a claim to 
relief that is plausible on its face.’” Elias v. Rolling Stone LLC, 872 F.3d 97, 104 (2d Cir. 
2017) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678 
(2009)). A plaintiff must allege sufficient facts to “nudge[] their claims across the line 
from conceivable to plausible[.]” Bell Atl. Corp. v.   Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007). 
“A claim has facial plausibility when the plaintiff pleads factual content that allows the 
court to draw the reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct 
alleged.” Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 678. “Threadbare recitals of the elements of a cause of action, 
supported by mere conclusory statements, do not suffice.” Jd. 
     The sufficiency of a complaint is evaluated using a “two-pronged approach[.]” 
Hayden v. Paterson, 594 F.3d 150, 161 (2d Cir. 2010) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting /gbal, 556 U.S. at 679). First, the court discounts legal conclusions and 
“[t]hreadbare recitals of the elements of a cause of action, supported by mere conclusory 
statements[.]” Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 678. Second, the court considers whether the factual 
allegations, taken as true, “plausibly give rise to an entitlement to relief.” Jd. at 679. This 
second step is fact-bound and context-specific, requiring the court “to draw on its judicial 
experience and common sense.” /d. The court does not “weigh the evidence” or “evaluate 
the likelihood” that a plaintiffs claims will prevail. Christiansen v. Omnicom Grp., Inc., 
852 F.3d 195, 201 (2d Cir. 2017). 
     Although VHRC Defendants’ motion does not indicate it is a partial motion to 
dismiss, it is directed only to Counts I and II of the PSAC. Accordingly, the court 
addresses only those counts. 
     B.     Whether the PSAC States a Procedural Due Process Liberty Interest 
           Claim. 
     To state a claim for a “constitutionally cognizable deprivation of liberty without 
sufficient process[,]” a plaintiff must assert “(1) that [he or] she possessed a cognizable 
liberty interest, and (2) that the defendants deprived [him or] her of that same liberty 
without providing process adequate to justify their actions.” Velez v. Levy, 401 F.3d 75, 

                                     13 

87 (2d Cir. 2005) (footnote omitted). Generally, “[a] person’s interest in his or her good 
reputation alone, apart from a more tangible interest, is not a liberty or property interest 
sufficient to invoke the procedural protections of the Due Process Clause or create a 
cause of action under §  1983.” Patterson v. City of Utica, 370 F.3d 322, 329-30 (2d Cir. 
2004). 
     The “stigma plus” doctrine “provides a remedy for government defamation under 
federal constitutional law[]” when it occurs concurrently with the loss of a tangible 
interest. Sadallah v. City of Utica, 383 F.3d 34, 38 (2d Cir. 2004). 
     To prevail on a “stigma plus” claim, a plaintiff must show (1) the utterance 
     of a statement sufficiently derogatory to injure his or her reputation, that is 
     capable of being proved false, and that he or she claims is false, and (2) a 
     material state-imposed burden or state-imposed alteration of the plaintiff's 
     status or rights. 
Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
     “While there is ‘no rigid requirement that both the ‘stigma’ and the ‘plus’ must 
issue from the same government actor or at the same time,’ they must be ‘sufficiently 
proximate.’” Mudge v. Zugalla, 939 F.3d 72, 80 (2d Cir. 2019) (alteration adopted) 
(quoting Velez, 401 F.3d at 89). “This requirement will be satisfied where (1) the stigma 
and plus would, to a reasonable observer, appear connected—for example, due to their 
order of occurrence or their origin—and (2) the actor imposing the plus adopted 
(explicitly or implicitly) those statements in doing so.” Velez, 401 F.3d at 89 (internal 
citations omitted). 
     “[D]eleterious effects which flow directly from a sullied reputation [are] 
normally .. . insufficient” to “satisf[y] the ‘plus’ prong” of a stigma-plus claim, including 
“the impact that defamation might have on job prospects, or, for that matter, romantic 
aspirations, friendships, self-esteem, or any other typical consequence of a bad 
reputation.” Valmonte v. Bane, 18 F.3d 992, 1001 (2d Cir. 1994). Instead, “the damage 
[to one’s reputation] must be accompanied by some significant deprivation[.]” ONeill v. 
City of Auburn, 23 F.3d 685, 691 n.2 (2d Cir. 1994). Courts have found the “deprivation 
of a plaintiff's property’ or the ‘termination of a plaintiff's government employment’” to 

                                     14 

be burdens sufficient to satisfy the stigma-plus standard. Mudge, 939 F.3d at 80 (quoting 
Sadallah, 383 F.3d at 38). 
     With regard to adequate process, “[a] hearing must be held for the limited purpose 
of giving a discharged employee an opportunity to clear her name. A name-clearing 
hearing significantly reduces the risk that an employee will be dismissed with false 
stigmatizing charges placed in her personnel file.” Velez, 401 F.3d at 91 (quoting Donato 
v. Plainview-Old Bethpage Cent. Sch. Dist., 96 F.3d 623, 633 (2d Cir.  1996)) (internal 
quotation marks omitted); see also Stone v. Town of Irasburg, 2014 VT 43, 435, 196 Vt. 
356, 371, 98 A.3d 769, 779 (“To remedy a stigma-plus violation through a post- 
deprivation name-clearing hearing, due process requires . .  . an opportunity to clear one’s 
name before a body which is sufficiently neutral that a person has some realistic chance 
of success.”). The Supreme Court “has squarely rejected the notion that the decision 
maker at a name-clearing hearing cannot be both an investigator and adjudicator.” 
Donato, 985 F. Supp. at 318 (citing Withrow v. Larkin, 421 U.S. 35, 58 (1975) (“[T]he 
combination of investigative and adjudicative functions does not, without more, 
constitute a due process violation[.]”)). 
           1.     Whether Plaintiff Was Entitled to Process Under VHRC Rule 
                 33. 
     Citing VHRC Rule 33, Plaintiff asserts that VHRC Defendants oversaw the 
investigation and were required to hold a name-clearing meeting pursuant to 9 V.S.A. 
§ 4553(c)* and 3 V.S.A. § 809(a).? VHRC Defendants counter that VHRC Rule 33 
describes the executive director’s discretionary decision-making, rather than establishing 
a mandatory good cause witness-identity protection process, and provisions under 3 
V.S.A. § 800 do not apply because the decision “is not a ‘contested case’ as defined by 3 

* “To carry out its duties under this chapter, the Commission shall adopt procedural and 
substantive rules in accordance with the provisions of 3 V.S.A. chapter 25.” 9 V.S.A. § 4553(c). 
     a contested case, all parties shall be given an opportunity for hearing after reasonable 
notice.” 3 V.S.A. § 809(a). 
                                      15 

V.S.A. § 801(b)(2).’4 (Doc. 114 at 8 n.6.) 
     VHRC Rule 33 states that the identities of non-party witnesses in an investigative 
file “may be revealed . .  . upon request” unless the VHRC Executive Director “has 
determined that there is good cause” not to do so. Vt. Admin Code §  11-1-1,   933. The 
plain terms of VHRC Rule 33 authorize VHRC’s Executive Director to redact witness 
names based on his or her good cause determination. It does not entitle a party or a 
witness to that result, nor does it require a hearing prior to the Executive Director’s 
decision. A stigma-plus claim is thus not available based on an alleged violation of 
VHRC Rule 33. 
           2.     Whether Plaintiff was Entitled to Process Under 9 V.S.A. 
                 § 4554(e). 
     Plaintiff claims he was entitled to procedural due process under 9 V.S.A. 
§ 4554(e), which provides that VHRC “shall make every reasonable effort to eliminate 
the discrimination by informal means such as conference, conciliation, and persuasion.” 
VHRC Defendants contend that a § 4554(e) hearing is only required before VHRC files 
its own action and “implicitly dictates that [VJHRC must try to resolve the case with the 
entity that was found to have discriminated, not individual witnesses[,]” and that any 
other interpretation would produce “a clearly unworkable result.” (Doc. 114 at 8.) 
     Contrary to VHRC Defendants’ contention, § 4554(e) does not condition the 
requirement to “make every reasonable effort to eliminate the discrimination by informal 
means such as conference, conciliation, and persuasion[]” upon the filing of an action. 
Instead, if the “informal means” fails to prove satisfactory to a majority of the VHRC 
members within six months, VHRC must either file an action or dismiss, unless there is 
consent to extend “ongoing good faith negotiations[.]” 9 V.S.A. § 4554(e) (“If the case is 
not disposed of by informal means in a manner satisfactory to a majority of the 
Commission within six months, it shall either bring an action in Superior Court . . . or 

 «<Contested case’ means a proceeding, including but not restricted to rate-making and 
licensing, in which the legal rights, duties, or privileges of a party are required by law to be 
determined by an agency after an opportunity for hearing.” 3 V.S.A. § 801(b)(2). 
                                     16 

dismiss the proceedings, unless an extension is necessary to complete ongoing good faith 
negotiations and all parties consent to the extension.”). The “informal means” is thus 
contemplated to take place before an action is filed, not ifan action is filed, and is 
triggered only by a finding of unlawful discrimination. 
      Investigator Campbell interviewed Plaintiff before the Investigative Report’s 
release, but Plaintiff claims he was not provided the mandatory “conference, conciliation, 
and persuasion” process after unlawful discrimination was found.’ Jd. Plaintiff has 
therefore plausibly alleged that he was deprived of a statutory process to which he was 
entitled. 
            3.     Whether Plaintiff's Stigma-Plus Claim is Sufficient Under Velez. 
      In the court’s dismissal of Count I on reconsideration, it found that Plaintiff had 
plausibly alleged a “stigma” in light of the characterization of his actions in the 
Investigative Report as well as a “government-imposed alteration of status” in the form 
of “a de facto demotion at [the VSP] in light of his diminished duties and reduced 
income, and he has further lost a position at [UVMMC].” (Doc. 90 at 6) (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted). Nevertheless, the court found Plaintiff had not 
satisfied the final Velez requirement: 
      [Plaintiff] fail[ed] to plausibly allege that the VHRC Defendants had the 
      legal authority to bring about a change in his employment or offer due 
     process to him. Stated differently, because [VHRC Defendants] “had no 
     legal authority to bring about [Plaintiffs] ouster” or demotion, they could 
     not “be held legally accountable for the alleged process failure.” Velez, 401 

> To the extent VHRC Defendants argue that Plaintiff was not a party to the discrimination but 
merely a witness, the Investigative Report nonetheless affirmatively accused him of 
unprofessional conduct and unlawful discrimination. See, e.g., Doc. 12-2 at 88 (“[Plaintiff] 
denigrated Dr. Clemmons to Barreda and disparaged her, telling him he would cover for him and 
that she was unreasonable.”); id. at 93 (“[Plaintiff’s] rudeness, accusatory attitude[,] and his 
dismissiveness of the Clemmons[es]’ concerns, even though he had never met them before, 
strongly suggest that [Plaintiff] either already had an unfavorable opinion about Dr. Clemmons 
prior to his arrival, or that he formed one upon seeing her and her brother.”) (emphasis in 
original); id. at 95 (“[Plaintiff’s] treatment of Barreda and his treatment of both Clemmons [es], 
particularly Dr. Clemmons, is not evidence of professional conduct—it is evidence of pretext and 
it is proof of discrimination against Dr. Clemmons on the basis of race, color, and sex.”) 
(emphasis in original). 
                                      17 

      F.3d at 93. To the extent that Plaintiff alleges Mr. Christie “refused to 
      provide [him] an opportunity to meet with [the V]HRC to discuss clearing 
      his name” after the alleged deprivation, he does not allege how a name 
      clearing would have altered his VSP employment status or duties. (Doc. 58- 
      4 at 46,  7 113.) 
(Doc. 90 at 7) (fifth and sixth alterations in original). The court advised, “TijJn an amended 
complaint, Plaintiff may seek to explain this causal relationship and the alleged remedies 
[VHRC Defendants] could have provided him. At this juncture, he has not done so.” Jd. 
      Plaintiff's new allegations in the PSAC shift his theory of liability to one that 
tacitly recognizes VHRC Defendants could not have impacted the terms and conditions 
of his VSP employment.® He argues this is not dispositive because the focus of Velez is 
on the ability to provide process. VHRC Defendants disagree and assert that “Plaintiff 
lacks a nexus between the process he seeks (a name-clearing meeting with [VHRC 
Defendants]) and the alleged separate state-imposed alteration of status[,]” because he 
“fail[s] to explain how the [VJHRC could have provided him with process with respect to 
his employment.” (Doc. 109 at 5) (emphasis in original). 
      The Velez court focused on both the ability to provide process and the ability to 
impose adverse consequences: 
     None of the [members of a  first group of defendants] had the power to 
     provide process to the plaintiff. They did not undertake or oversee the 
     investigation, and they could order neither pre-removal review nor 
     post-removal remedies. As a consequence they cannot be held legally 
     accountable for the alleged process failure. The same is true as to [a 
     second group of defendants] . . . [that] had no legal authority to bring 
     about [the plaintiffs] ouster, for only [a certain defendant] was 
     empowered to impose that “plus.” Accordingly, [the] complaint does not 
     state a theory under which the [second group of defendants] can be taken to 
     have deprived [plaintiff] of her “stigma-plus” liberty interest. 
401 F.3d at 93 (emphasis supplied). 
     The Second Circuit recently recognized Velez does not permit a stigma-plus claim 
based on a  right to process alone, albeit in an unpublished decision. 

° Plaintiff retains this claim for his procedural due process claim based on a property interest, 
which the court addresses separately. 
                                      18 

      [Plaintiffs] claim for damages based on her alleged loss of a protected 
      liberty interest without due process of law cannot lie against defendants 
      who had neither the power to provide process to her nor the power to 
      inflict the deprivation. Only [the judicial defendants] had the power to 
      provide process such as an investigation and a  pre- or post-deprivation 
      hearing and to decide in what manner [plaintiff] could work as an 
      interpreter. Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of the district court 
      dismissing [plaintiffs] stigma-plus claims against the DA Defendants. 
Walker v. Fitzpatrick, 814 F. App’x 620, 625 (2d Cir. 2020) (emphasis supplied). 
      “[A] statute that merely establishes procedural requirements does not thereby 
create a liberty interest, because an ‘expectation of receiving process is not, without 
more, a liberty interest protected by the Due Process Clause.” Rodriguez v. McLoughlin, 
214 F.3d 328, 339 (2d Cir. 2000) (quoting BAM Hist. Dist. Ass’n v. Koch, 723 F.2d 233, 
237 (2d Cir. 1983)) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
      Process is not an end in itself. Its constitutional purpose is to protect a 
      substantive interest to which the individual has a  legitimate claim of 
      entitlement. .  .. The State may choose to require procedures for reasons 
      other than protection against deprivation of substantive rights, of course, 
     but in making that choice the State does not create an independent 
      substantive right. 
Id. (quoting Olim v.  Wakinekona, 461 U.S. 238, 249 (1983)) (alteration in original). “It is 
the ‘substantive limits on the authority of state officials,’ not the ‘procedural 
requirements,’ that ‘ground[]’ a liberty interest.” Bangs v. Smith, 84 F.4th 87, 100-01 (2d 
Cir. 2023) (quoting BAM Hist. Dist. Ass’n, 723 F.2d at 236) (alteration in original). To 
the extent Plaintiff asserts that the right to statutory process alone creates a liberty 
interest, that claim is in conflict with well-established law. 
     Since Velez, courts have uniformly held that the process-provider must have some 
control or influence over the “plus” to be liable for a stigma-plus liberty interest claim.’ 

7 See, e.g., Dolcine v. Hanson, 2021 WL 949748, at *8 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 12, 2021) (granting 
summary judgment to defendants who, “[a]s individual officers with no authority over or 
supervision of Plaintiff, . .  . ‘could order neither [the] pre-removal review nor post-removal 
remedies’ that due process required, and they ‘had no legal authority to bring about [Plaintiff's 
suspension]””) (second and third alterations in original) (citing Velez v. Levy, 401 F.3d 75, 93 (2d 
Cir. 2005)); Cirulli v. Astorino, 2015 WL 4635707, at *11 (S.D.N.Y. Aug. 3, 2015) (holding that 
certain defendants “cannot be held accountable for the alleged process failure[]” because “[t]here 
                                     19 

This is consistent with the purpose of procedural due process which is to furnish a 
“meaningful opportunity to invoke the discretion of the decisionmaker . . . before the 
[adverse action] takes effect.” Cleveland Bd. of Educ. v. Loudermill, 470 U.S. 532, 543 
(1985). 
      Although Plaintiff plausibly alleges that VHRC Defendants had the power to 
provide him process, he does not further plausibly allege that VARC Defendants were 
“empowered to impose that ‘plus’” by effectuating changes in his VSP employment. 
Velez, 401 F.3d at 93; cf Chiaravallo v. Middletown Transit Dist., 561 F. Supp. 3d 257, 
282 (D. Conn. 2021) (finding the plaintiff had “set[] forth evidence that [a defendant] 
leveraged control over [the transit district’s] funding and contract in order to orchestrate 
[plaintiff's] immediate removal[,]” which was “authority over the termination process 
[that] distinguishe[d] the case at bar from Velez”). Reputational harm, alone, will not 
suffice. See Sadallah, 383 F.3d at 38 (“[D]eleterious effects [flowing] directly from a 
sullied reputation, standing alone, do not constitute a plus under the stigma plus 
doctrine.”) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Plaintiff's stigma-plus claim 
as to VHRC Defendants is therefore insufficient as a matter of law and must be 
dismissed. 
     Based on the foregoing, the court GRANTS VHRC Defendants’ motion to dismiss 
Plaintiff's procedural due process liberty interest claim asserted against them in their 

is no basis to infer that [they] had the power to order pre-deprivation process or post-deprivation 
remedies”); Orr v.  Wisner, 2010 WL 2667918, at *7-8 (D. Conn. June 29, 2010) (finding certain 
defendants’ actions which “consist largely of making recommendations . . . that [Plaintiff] be 
suspended or fired” insufficient for a stigma-plus claim when it was undisputed that other 
defendants “had the ‘ultimate authority’ to discipline [plaintiff] and to provide him with 
process”); Anemone v. Metro. Transp. Auth., 410 F. Supp. 2d 255, 270 (S.D.N.Y. 2006) 
(dismissing a due process liberty interest claim against an individual who made stigmatizing 
statements but was subject to a state law that “limit[ed] [him] to investigating abuse and 
recommending remedial action and does not contemplate any role for him in adjudicating an 
employee’s employment status”); see also Chabad Chayil, Inc. v. Sch. Bd. of Miami-Dade Cnty., 
48 F.4th 1222, 1235-36 (11th Cir. 2022) (“[W]e agree with the district court that even if 
[plaintiff] had properly demonstrated stigma plus another concrete harm, it cannot show that the 
OIG caused that harm. . .  . [T]he OIG’s role is to conduct investigations and issue 
reports . . . [but] does not have the authority to refuse any group permission to use school board 
property—that power lies with MDCPS.”) (footnote omitted). 
                                     20 

individual capacities. 
      C.     Whether the PSAC States a Procedural Due Process Property Interest 
            Claim. 
      In Count II, Plaintiff renews his dismissed procedural due process claim against 
VHRC Defendants in their individual capacities based on a protected property interest. 
As previously asserted, he alleges that his “job as a VSP trooper was protected under 
state law,” (Doc.  106 at 69, § 154), and the Investigative Report “placed a false ‘badge of 
infamy’ on [him] as a racist” without procedural due process. Id. 4 155. He claims that 
his “work conditions became intolerable as he can no longer function effectively and 
safely as a law enforcement officer[,]” his “career in law enforcement has ended[,]” and 
thus his “job as a trooper was effectively taken from him” by VHRC Defendants. Jd. at 
70,   156-57. 
     Plaintiff's allegations that VHRC Defendants caused a change in his VSP 
employment status remain implausible. The PSAC is bereft of factual allegations that 
VHRC Defendants had the authority to alter the terms and conditions of his employment. 
The court previously dismissed Count II for this reason and that is the law of the case. 
See Christianson v. Colt Indus. Operating Corp., 486 U.S. 800, 815-16 (1988) (“[T]he 
doctrine of the law of the case posits that when a court decides upon a  rule of law, that 
decision should continue to govern the same issues in subsequent stages in the same 
case.”) (alteration adopted) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted); Johnson v. 
Holder, 564 F.3d 95, 99 (2d Cir. 2009) (“The law of the case doctrine commands that 
‘when a  court has ruled on an issue, that decision should generally be adhered to by that 
court in subsequent stages in the same case’ unless ‘cogent and compelling reasons 
militate otherwise.””) (citation omitted); Am. Hotel Int’l Grp., Inc. v. OneBeacon Ins. Co., 
611 F. Supp. 2d 373, 378 (S.D.N.Y. 2009), aff'd, 374 F. App’x 71 (2d Cir. 2010) 
(observing that a trial court decision “remains the law of the case[]” unless reversed on 
appeal). 
     Under the law of the case, amendments to pleadings must propose a new ground 
for liability rather than merely reassert claims that have been dismissed. See Perkins v. 

                                     21 

Perez, 2020 WL 248686, at *4 (S.D.N.Y. Jan. 16, 2020) (alterations adopted) (“Where an 
amended complaint ‘is in large part identical to a plaintiff's  first complaint, the law of the 
case doctrine counsels against reconsideration of’ a court’s earlier dismissal.”) (quoting 
Weslowski v. Zugibe, 96 F. Supp. 3d 308, 316 (S.D.N.Y. 2015), aff'd, 626 F. App’x 20 
(2d Cir. 2015)); Barkai v. Neuendorf, 2024 WL 710315, at *6 (S.D.N.Y. Feb. 21, 2024) 
(“The mere filing of an amended complaint, repleading these claims, does not entitle 
[p]laintiff to relitigate them absent ‘extraordinary circumstances’.”) (citing Weslowski, 96 
F. Supp. 3d at 315-16). 
      Because of the law of the case, the court GRANTS VHRC Defendants’ motion to 
dismiss Plaintiffs Count II procedural due process property interest claim asserted 
against them in their individual capacities. For the same reason, any claim that is 
similarly a reiteration of a dismissed claim is DISMISSED sua sponte. 
IV.    WVHRC Defendants’ Request for Partial Final Judgment. 
      VHRC Defendants request final judgment in their favor pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 
54 on Counts I, II, and VI in their individual capacities and all counts in their official 
capacities. Because the court has not dismissed Plaintiffs substantive due process claim 
(Count III), invasion of privacy claim (Count IV), or defamation claim (Count V) to the 
extent the claims arise out of the release of the Investigative Report to Seven Days, it 
considers this a request for partial final judgment under Rule 54(b). 
     Rule 54(b) authorizes a district court to enter partial final judgment when 
     three requirements have been satisfied: (1) there are multiple claims or 
     parties, (2) at least one claim or the rights and liabilities of at least one party 
     has been finally determined, and (3) the court makes an express 
     determination that there is no just reason for delay of entry of final 
     judgment as to fewer than all of the claims or parties involved in the action. 
Linde v. Arab Bank, PLC, 882 F.3d 314, 322-23 (2d Cir. 2018) (alterations adopted) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
     “[I]n deciding whether there are no just reasons to delay the appeal of individual 
final judgments in [a] setting such as this, a district court must take into account judicial 
administrative interests as well as the equities involved.” Curtiss- Wright Corp. v. Gen. 

                                     22 

Elec. Co., 446 U.S. 1, 8 (1980). A court should also “consider such factors as whether the 
claims under review were separable from the others remaining to be adjudicated and 
whether the nature of the claims already determined was such that no appellate court 
would have to decide the same issues more than once even if there were subsequent 
appeals.” /d. (footnote omitted). 
      Even where the adjudicated and remaining claims may be decided separately, an 
entry of partial final judgment “should be used only in the infrequent harsh case,” and 
only if there exists “some danger of hardship or injustice through delay which would be 
alleviated by immediate appeal[.]” O Bert ex rel. Estate of O’Bert v.  Vargo, 331 F.3d 29, 
41 (2d Cir. 2003) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Cullen v. Margiotta, 618 
F.2d 226, 228 (2d Cir.  1980) (per curiam)).  A danger of hardship exists “where a plaintiff 
might be prejudiced by a delay in recovering a monetary award, or where an expensive 
and duplicative trial could be avoided if, without delaying prosecution of the surviving 
claims, a dismissed claim were reversed in time to be tried with the other claims[.]” 
Advanced Magnetics, Inc. v. Bayfront Partners, Inc., 106 F.3d 11, 16 (2d Cir. 1997) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
     “The matter of whether to direct the entry of a partial final judgment in advance of 
the final adjudication of all of the claims in the suit must [also] be considered in light of 
the goal of judicial economy as served by the ‘historic federal policy against piecemeal 
appeals.’” O ’Bert, 331 F.3d at 40-41 (quoting Curtiss-Wright Corp., 446 U.S. at 8). 
“Respect for that policy requires that the court’s power .. . be exercised sparingly[,]” 
bearing in mind “that ‘[n]ot all’ dismissals of ‘individual claims should be immediately 
appealable, even if they are in some sense separable from the remaining unresolved 
claims.’” Jd. at 41 (quoting Curtiss-Wright Corp., 446 U.S. at 8). “Within this 
framework, the determination of whether to grant Rule 54(b) certification is committed to 
the discretion of the district court and will be set aside only for an abuse of discretion.” 
Harriscom Svenska AB v. Harris Corp., 947 F.2d 627, 629 (2d Cir.  1991). 
     Plaintiff asserted three 42 U.S.C. § 1983 claims and three state law tort claims 
against VHRC Defendants in their official and individual capacities, and the court 
                                     23 

dismissed Counts I, II, and VI against them in their individual capacities and all claims 
asserted against them in their official capacities. Each of Plaintiffs claims arise from the 
allegedly wrongful release of the Investigative Report to Seven Days. The substantial 
factual overlap between the dismissed claims and the remaining claims weighs against 
the entry of partial final judgment in VHRC Defendants’ favor. See Hogan v. Consol. 
Rail Corp., 961 F.2d 1021, 1026 (2d Cir.  1992) (“[T]he interrelationship of the dismissed 
and surviving claims is generally a reason for not granting a Rule 54(b) certification, not 
a reason for granting it[.]”) (emphasis in original). 
     Although the court previously granted partial final judgment in favor of VHRC, 
which has been dismissed from this action on sovereign immunity grounds, see Doc. 66 
at 24, claims against VHRC Defendants remain. An entry of partial final judgment thus 
would fail to “limit piecemeal litigation” and “maximize judicial efficiency.” Cuoco v. 
Moritsugu, 222 F.3d 99, 110 (2d Cir. 2000); see also Advanced Magnetics, Inc., 106 F.3d 
at 17 (observing that judicial efficiency is better served when “only one jury, rather than 
two, will be required to become familiar with . .  . the events surrounding the [case]’”). 
There are no “countervailing equities that would justify partial judgment[.]” Horn v. Med. 
Marijuana, Inc., 2019 WL 4871499, at *2 (W.D.N.Y. Oct. 3, 2019). 
     VHRC Defendants also do not clearly “articulate[] any unusual hardship or 
injustice that [they], or any other party, would endure if required to await, in accordance 
with normal federal practice, the disposition of the entire case before obtaining a  final 
judgment” on the dismissed claims. Timperio v. Bronx-Lebanon Hosp. Ctr., 2020 WL 
9211177, at *3 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 9, 2020) (alterations adopted) (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
     Pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(b), VHRC Defendants’ request for partial final 
judgment in their favor is DENIED WITHOUT PREJUDICE. 

                                     24 

                               CONCLUSION 
     Based on the foregoing, the court GRANTS IN PART and DENIES IN PART 
Plaintiff's motion to amend, GRANTS VHRC Defendants’ motion to dismiss Counts I 
and II, DISMISSES reiterated claims against VHRC Defendants sua sponte, and 
DENIES WITHOUT PREJUDICE VHRC Defendants’ motion for partial final judgment. 
(Doc. 109.) 
SO ORDERED.
     Dated at Burlington, in the District of Vermont, this [eo day of June, 2024. 

                                         United States District Court 

                                     25

---

US  Ueiscd  □□□□□ 
                                                               DISTIDE   Ge Wie □□ 
                     UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                
                                  FOR  THE                    2424 AUG  10  PM  I: 28 
                          DISTRICT OF VERMONT                   piss 
ANDREW LEISE,                                )                     oy     AW 
                                            )                         Po ee  bE  □□  ok 
     Plaintiff,                             ) 
                                            ) 
           V.                               )      Case No. 2:22-cv-00009 
                                            ) 
VERMONT HUMAN RIGHTS                        ) 
COMMISSION, KEVIN CHRISTIE, BOR             ) 
YANG, DA CAPO PUBLISHING, INC., and   _) 
JOHN AND JANE DOE I-X,                      ) 
                                            ) 
      Defendants.                           ) 

             ENTRY ORDER DENYING WITHOUT PREJUDICE 
   DA CAPO PUBLISHING’S MOTION FOR RULE 54(b) JUDGMENT AND 
         GRANTING VERMONT HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION’S 
                   MOTION FOR RULE 54(b) JUDGMENT 
                                 (Docs. 69, 72) 
      Pending before the court are motions for final judgment filed by Defendants Da 
Capo Publishing, Inc. (“Seven Days”) and the Vermont Human Rights Commission 
(“VHRC”) on April 10, 2023 and April 13, 2023, respectively. (Docs. 69, 72.) Plaintiff 
Andrew Leise (“Plaintiff”) opposed both motions on April 17, 2023. (Doc. 75, 76.) Seven 
Days replied on April 26, 2023 (Doc. 81), and VHRC replied on May 1, 2023. (Doc. 83.) 
      Plaintiff is represented by Kaveh S. Shahi, Esq. VHRC is represented by Justin G. 
Sherman, Esq., and Lisa B. Shelkrot, Esq. Seven Days is represented by Matthew B. 
Byrne, Esq. 
I.     Conclusions of Law and Analysis. 
      Following the court’s March 24, 2023 Opinion and Order dismissing all claims 
against Seven Days and VHRC (Doc. 66), those parties move the court to enter partial 
final judgment in their favor pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(b). Under Rule 54(b), a 
district court may certify a partial final judgment where: “(1) there are multiple claims or 

parties; (2) at least one claim or the rights and liabilities of at least one party has been 
determined; and (3) there is ‘an express determination that there is no just reason for 
delay.’” Transp.  Workers Union of Am., Loc.  100, AFL-CIO v. N.Y.C. Transit Auth., 505 
F.3d 226, 230 (2d Cir. 2007) (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(b)). 
     “{I]n deciding whether there are no just reasons to delay the appeal of individual 
final judgments in a setting such as this, a district court must take into account judicial 
administrative interests as well as the equities involved.” Curtiss-Wright Corp. v. Gen. 
Elec. Co., 446 U.S. 1, 8 (1980). A court should also “consider such factors as whether the 
claims under review were separable from the others remaining to be adjudicated and 
whether the nature of the claims already determined was such that no appellate court 
would have to decide the same issues more than once even if there were subsequent 
appeals.” Id. 
     Even where the adjudicated and remaining claims may be decided separately, a 
partial entry of final judgment “should be used only in the infrequent harsh case,” and 
only if there exists “some danger of hardship or injustice through delay which would be 
alleviated by immediate appeal[.]” O Bert ex rel. Estate of O’Bert v.  Vargo, 331 F.3d 29, 
41 (2d Cir. 2003) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Cullen v. Margiotta, 618 
F.2d 226, 228 (2d Cir.  1980)). A danger of hardship exists “where a plaintiff might be 
prejudiced by a delay in recovering a monetary award, or where an expensive and 
duplicative trial could be avoided if, without delaying prosecution of the surviving 
claims, a dismissed claim were reversed in time to be tried with the other claims[.]” 
Advanced Magnetics, Inc. v. Bayfront Partners, Inc., 106 F.3d 11, 16 (2d Cir. 1997) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
     “The matter of whether to direct the entry of a partial final judgment in advance of 
the final adjudication of all of the claims in the suit must [also] be considered in light of 
the goal of judicial economy as served by the ‘historic federal policy against piecemeal 
appeals.’” O’Bert, 331 F.3d at 40-41 (quoting Curtiss-Wright Corp., 446 U.S. at 8). 
“Respect for that policy requires that the court’s power . . . be exercised sparingly[,]” 
bearing in mind “that ‘[n]ot all’ dismissals of ‘individual claims should be immediately

appealable, even if they are in some sense separable from the remaining unresolved 
claims.’” Jd. at 41 (quoting Curtiss-Wright Corp., 446 U.S. at 8). “Within this 
framework, the determination of whether to grant Rule 54(b) certification is committed to 
the discretion of the district court and will be set aside only for an abuse of discretion.” 
Harriscom Svenska AB v. Harris Corp., 947 F.2d 627, 629 (2d Cir. 1991). 
     In this case, Plaintiff asserted three 42 U.S.C. § 1983 claims and three state law 
tort claims against Seven Days, VHRC, and two individual defendants in their official 
and individual capacities, Kevin Christie and Bor Yang. Plaintiff's Second Amended 
Complaint contains additional allegations against Mr. Christie and Ms. Yang, but does 
not modify his allegations against Seven Days or VHRC. This action thus involves 
multiple claims and multiple parties; however, all of the claims arise out of the same 
discrete set of facts. 
     Following the court’s dismissal of all claims against Seven Days on Fed. R. Civ. 
P. 12(b)(6) grounds and all claims against VHRC on sovereign immunity grounds, the 
rights and liabilities of those parties, but not others, have been decided at the trial level. 
Under Rule 54(b), the question is therefore whether there is any just reason to delay an 
appeal of the court’s dismissal of Seven Days and VHRC. 
     A.     Whether VHRC Is Entitled to Partial Final Judgment. 
     Plaintiff's claims all arise from VHRC’s allegedly wrongful release of an 
investigative report to Seven Days, which published the report. Plaintiff's claims against 
Seven Days and VHRC are not factually separate from his remaining § 1983 claim and 
tort claims against Mr. Christie and Ms. Yang. See Read v. Corning Inc., 371 F. Supp. 3d 
87, 93 (W.D.N.Y. 2019) (“Claims are generally treated as separable within the meaning 
of Rule 54(b) if they involve at least some different questions of fact and law and could 
be separately enforced[.]’’) (internal quotation marks omitted); Hudson River Sloop 
Clearwater, Inc. v. Dep’t of Navy, 891 F.2d 414, 418 (2d Cir. 1989) (“When the certified 
claims are based upon factual and legal questions that are distinct from those questions 
remaining before the trial court the certified claims may be considered separate claims

under Rule 54(b).”). This weighs against entry of partial final judgment in Seven Days’ 
or VRHC’s favor. 
     Because the court dismissed the claims against VHRC on sovereign immunity 
grounds, however, the issue presented by an appeal of that decision is legally separable 
from the substantive legal issues presented by an appeal filed after Plaintiff's claims are 
decided on the merits. There are also “countervailing equities that would justify partial 
judgment notwithstanding the relatedness of the claims at issue.” Horn v. Med. 
Marijuana, Inc., 2019 WL 4871499, at *2 (W.D.N.Y. Oct. 3, 2019). Mr. Christie and Ms. 
Yang have sought interlocutory appeal of the court’s denial of qualified immunity for the 
§ 1983 claims against them. Entering partial final judgment in VHRC’s favor would 
promote judicial efficiency by allowing the Second Circuit to consolidate any potential 
appeal of the court’s sovereign immunity decision regarding VHRC with the pending 
interlocutory appeal by Mr. Christie and Ms. Yang. Resolving the immunity question, in 
turn, would prevent potentially “expensive and duplicative” proceedings at a later date 
and allow Plaintiff's claims against related parties to be tried together, rather than 
permitting the sovereign immunity issue to be appealed only after the resolution of the 
same claims against other defendants, including Seven Days, which has no apparent 
relationship with the other defendants outside of this case. See Advanced Magnetics, Inc., 
106 F.3d at 17 (observing that judicial efficiency is better served when “only one jury, 
rather than two, will be required to become familiar with . .  . the events surrounding the 
[case]”’). 
     The goals of “limit[ing] piecemeal litigation” and “maximiz[ing] judicial 
efficiency” support the court’s conclusion that there is no just reason for delay. Cuoco v. 
Mortisugu, 222 F.3d 99, 110 (2d Cir. 2000). The court therefore GRANTS VHRC’s 
motion to enter partial final judgment in its favor pursuant to Rule 54(b). 
     B.     Whether Seven Days Is Entitled to Partial Final Judgment. 
     Seven Days argues that if the court enters partial final judgment in VHRC’s favor, 
in light of Cuoco v. Mortisugu, it should do so in its favor as well. In Cuoco, the Second 
Circuit held:

     [T]his case presents the unusual situation in which the entire case is before 
     us via the Defendants—Appellants’ interlocutory appeal. The reason we 
     require a district court to justify entry of a partial judgment is in order to 
     limit piecemeal litigation and maximize judicial efficiency. Under the 
     present circumstances, however, where we can resolve the case in its 
     entirety in this single appeal, those goals militate in favor of relaxing our 
     interpretation of the district court’s discretion under Rule 54(b). Otherwise, 
     we would be sending the cross-appeal back to the district court to await a 
     final judgment as to the claims against the  Defendants—A ppellants,  a final 
     judgment that we are today directing be entered on their behalf. We 
     therefore assert jurisdiction over the cross-appeal. 
222 F.3d at 110 (footnote omitted). The Second Circuit explained that a Rule 54(b) 
judgment was appropriate in Cuoco because “the case was an unusual one in which there 
was properly before us an interlocutory appeal presenting a substantive issue that was 
dispositive of both the interlocutory appeal and the dismissed claims.” O Bert, 331 F.3d 
at 41-42 (citing Cuoco, 222 F.3d at 110). “The limited exception made by Cuoco is 
applicable only where the dispositive issues are brought before this Court by the 
permissible interlocutory appeal itself, not where issues as to dismissed claims would 
come before us only by reason of the district court’s entry of a Rule 54(b) judgment.” Jd. 
at 43. 
     Unlike in Cuoco, the substantive issue in the pending interlocutory appeal is 
whether Mr. Christie and Ms. Yang are entitled to qualified immunity. This issue has no 
legal relationship to the dismissal of the §  1983, defamation, and tort claims against 
Seven Days on entirely different grounds. Entering partial final judgment in favor of 
Seven Days may open the door to “piecemeal review” of the same or similar factual and 
legal issues in successive appeals. Cuoco, 222 F.3d at 110; see also Harriscom Svenska 
AB, 947 F.2d at 629 (“In general, a Rule 54(b) certification of the dismissal of fewer than 
all the claims in an action should not be granted if the same or closely related issues 
remain to be litigated.”’) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
     Although Seven Days contends that the equities favor entry of a Rule 54(b) 
judgment in its favor because refusal to do so will cause it to “incur monitoring costs” 
related to tracking the case’s progress and leave it with a “nagging sense of uncertainty”

(Doc. 69 at 4), these concerns are present in every case where some defendants but not 
others are dismissed at the pleading stage. “[T]he simple fact that part of the case is 
immediately appealable is not a sufficient reason to enter a Rule 54(b) judgment as to 
another part.” O Bert, 331 F.3d at 43. The availability of interlocutory appellate review 
of the qualified immunity issue does not justify the entry of Rule 54(b) judgment in favor 
of Seven Days. 
     Seven Days has not clearly “articulated any unusual hardship or injustice that it, or 
any other party, would endure if required to await, in accordance with normal federal 
practice, the disposition of the entire case before obtaining a  final judgment.” Timperio v. 
Bronx-Lebanon Hosp. Ctr., 2020 WL 9211177, at *3 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 9, 2020) 
(alterations adopted) (internal quotation marks omitted); see also Crespo v. Carvajal, 
2021 WL 4237002, at *6 (E.D.N.Y. Sept.  14, 2021) (finding “certain Plaintiffs’ advanced 
age, illness, or the protracted nature of the litigation, . .  . [did not] warrant Rule 54(b) 
certification as the delay caused by having to wait to appeal until after final judgment is 
entered is inherent in every denial of Rule 54(b) certification”). There is no chilling of its 
First Amendment rights when the claims against it have been dismissed. 
     Because there are just reasons to delay an appeal by Seven Days and no just 
reasons to expedite it, Seven Days’ motion to enter Rule 54(b) judgment in its favor is 
DENIED WITHOUT PREJUDICE.

                               CONCLUSION 
     For the foregoing reasons, the court GRANTS VHRC’s motion to enter final 
judgment in its favor pursuant to Rule 54(b) and DENIES WITHOUT PREJUDICE 
Seven Days’ Rule 54(b) motion for final partial judgment. The District Court Clerk is 
directed to enter a partial final judgment in favor of Defendant Vermont Human Rights 
Commission. 
SO ORDERED. 
                               «act                      Pr 
     Dated at Burlington, in the District of Vermont, this   Mb  day of August, 2023. 

                                         Christina Reiss, District Judge 
                                         United States District Court

---

pteepeat  □□□  □□□□□ 
                                                                wily Rice OS    □□□□ 
                     UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                     
                                  FOR THE                      2823 JUN 29  PM  2: §§ 
                          DISTRICT OF VERMONT                     CLERK 
ANDREW LEISE,                                )                       By    UW 
                                            )                                  □□ PREY 
     Plaintiff,                             ) 
                                            ) 
           V.                               )      Case No. 2:22-cv-00009 
                                            ) 
VERMONT HUMAN RIGHTS                         ) 
COMMISSION, KEVIN CHRISTIE, BOR              ) 
YANG, DA CAPO PUBLISHING, INC., and) 
JOHN AND JANE DOE I-X,                       ) 
                                            ) 
     Defendants.                            ) 

   OPINION AND ORDER GRANTING IN PART AND DENYING IN PART 
     DEFENDANTS’ MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION, GRANTING 
DEFENDANTS’ MOTION IN THE ALTERNATIVE FOR A CERTIFICATE OF 
      APPEALABILITY, AND DENYING PLAINTIFF’S MOTION FOR 
      CERTIFICATION OF DEFENDANTS’ APPEAL AS FRIVOLOUS 
                                (Docs. 68, 77) 
     Pending before the court is a motion for reconsideration, or in the alternative, 
motion for a certificate of appealability filed by Defendants Vermont Human Rights 
Commission (the “VHRC”), Kevin Christie, and Bor Yang (collectively, the “VHRC 
Defendants’’) (Doc. 68), as well as a motion for certification of Mr. Christie’s and Ms. 
Yang’s interlocutory appeal as frivolous filed by Plaintiff Andrew Leise. (Doc. 77.) 
     Plaintiff is represented by Kaveh S. Shahi, Esq. The VHRC Defendants are 
represented by Justin G. Sherman, Esq., and Lisa B. Shelkrot, Esq. Da Capo Publishing, 
Inc. (“Seven Days’) is represented by Matthew B. Byrne, Esq. 
1.     Factual and Procedural Background. 
     On March 24, 2023, the court issued an Opinion and Order granting in part and 
denying in part the VHRC Defendants’ April 1, 2022 motion to dismiss pursuant to Fed. 
R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6). (Doc. 66.) The Opinion and Order dismissed all of Plaintiff's claims 
against the VHRC Defendants except for Plaintiff's 42 U.S.C. § 1983 claims (Counts I, 

II, and IIT) against Mr. Christie and Ms. Yang in their individual Capacities, to the extent 
those claims relate to the allegedly wrongful release of a confidential investigative report 
(the “Investigative Report”) to the newspaper Seven Days, and Plaintiff's invasion of 
privacy and defamation claims (Counts IV and V) against Mr. Christie and Ms. Yang in 
their individual capacities, to the extent those claims relate to the release of the 
Investigative Report to Seven Days. The court dismissed Seven Days, the VHRC, Mr. 
Christie in his official capacity, and Ms. Yang in her official capacity from the case. It 
deferred ruling on whether Mr. Christie and Ms. Yang were entitled to qualified 
immunity on the § 1983 claims until after the development of a factual record. 
     The parties do not challenge the Opinion and Order’s recitation of the factual 
allegations in Plaintiff's Supplemental First Amended Complaint (“SFAC”) which the 
court incorporates by reference herein. 
II.   | Conclusions of Law and Analysis. 
     A.     The VHRC Defendants’ Motion for Reconsideration. 
     The VHRC Defendants seek reconsideration of the court’s denial of their motion 
to dismiss with regard to Plaintiff's § 1983 claims because the court failed to analyze 
whether the SFAC states a § 1983 claim for which relief may be granted. Incorporating 
by reference the arguments made in their motion to dismiss, they seek dismissal of those 
claims pursuant to Rule 12(b)(6) if they are not entitled to qualified immunity. 
     The VHRC Defendants further seek reconsideration of the court’s analysis of the 
sufficiency of Plaintiff’s state law defamation and invasion of privacy claims. Because 
the court held that Mr. Christie and Ms. Yang were entitled to absolute immunity with 
regard to the VHRC’s investigation, decision-making process, and Final Determination, 
they argue that the court erred by considering facts related to those issues in evaluating 
whether Plaintiff plausibly alleged actual malice. 
     “Tt is well-settled that a party may move for reconsideration and obtain relief only 
when the [movant] identifies ‘an intervening change of controlling law, the availability of 
new evidence, or the need to correct a clear error or prevent manifest injustice.’” Kolel 
Beth Yechiel Mechil of Tartikov, Inc. v.  YLL Irrevocable Tr., 729 F.3d 99, 108 (2d Cir.

2013) (quoting Virgin Atl. Airways, Ltd. v. Nat’l Mediation Bd., 956 F.2d 1245, 1255 (2d 
Cir. 1992)). This standard must be “narrowly construed and strictly applied so as to 
‘avoid duplicative rulings on previously considered issues’ and prevent [motions for 
reconsideration] from being used to advance theories not previously argued or ‘as a 
substitute for appealing a final judgment.’” Merced Irrigation Dist. v. Barclays Bank 
PLC, 178 F. Supp. 3d 181, 183 (S.D.N.Y. 2016) (quoting Montanile v. Nat’l Broad. Co., 
216 F. Supp. 2d 341, 342 (S.D.N.Y. 2002)); accord Analytical Survs., Inc. v. Tonga 
Partners, L.P., 684 F.3d 36, 52 (2d Cir. 2012) (“{T]he standard for granting a []motion 
for reconsideration is strict[.]”) (alteration adopted) (quoting Shrader v. CSX Transp., 
Inc., 70 F.3d 255, 257 (2d Cir. 1995)). 
     A motion for reconsideration is not “a vehicle for relitigating old issues, 
presenting the case under new theories, securing a rehearing on the merits, or otherwise 
taking a ‘second bite at the apple[.]’” Tonga Partners, L.P., 684 F.3d at 52 (quoting 
Sequa Corp. v. GBJ Corp., 156 F.3d 136, 144 (2d Cir. 1998)). 
     B.     Whether the Court Failed to Analyze the Sufficiency of Plaintiff's 
           § 1983 Claims. 
     The VHRC Defendants assert the court did not address the sufficiency of 
Plaintiff's § 1983 claims in its March 24, 2023 Opinion and Order and instead awaited 
resolution of the factual issue of whether the Investigative Report was required by law to 
remain confidential. If the Investigative Report is not required by law to remain 
confidential, the factual and legal crux of Plaintiff's § 1983 claims dissipates. 
     The VHRC Defendants contend that because the Investigative Report contains the 
investigator’s legal analysis, it was not part of the VHRC’s confidential investigative 
file.! The VHRC, however, lacks the authority to alter  a Vermont law through its own 
interpretation of what constitutes an “investigative file” unless the Vermont Legislature 
has delegated that authority. Accordingly, the question remains one of legislative intent 

! While Vermont law provides that the VHRC’s “investigative files shall be confidential[,]” 9 
V.S.A. § 4555(a)(1), the VHRC’s own rules are less clear and state: “The investigative file also 
does not include analysis, such as but not limited to, statistical analysis that the investigator has 
created with information provided by either party.” 11-1 Vt. Code R. § 1 (2014).

as well as how investigative reports are maintained in practice. Neither source of 
information is currently before the court. The court nonetheless agrees that the VHRC 
Defendants sought dismissal of the § 1983 claims under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) as an 
alternative ground in their motion. While it would be preferable to have a factual record 
for this analysis as well, the court agrees that certain claims may be dismissed at the 
pleading phase. The court thus GRANTS IN PART the VHRC Defendants’ request for 
reconsideration. 
     To survive a motion to dismiss filed pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P.  12(b)(6), “a 
complaint must contain sufficient factual matter, accepted as true, to ‘state a claim to 
relief that is plausible on its face.’” Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678 (2009) (quoting 
Bell Atl. Corp. v.   Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007)). A plaintiff must allege sufficient 
facts to “nudge[] their claims across the line from conceivable to plausible.” Twombly, 
550 U.S. at 570. “A claim has facial plausibility when the plaintiff pleads factual content 
that allows the court to draw the reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the 
misconduct alleged.” Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 678. 
     The sufficiency of a plaintiff's complaint under Rule 12(b)(6) is evaluated using a 
“two-pronged approach[.]” Hayden v. Paterson, 594 F.3d 150, 161 (2d Cir. 2010) 
(internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting /gbal, 556 U.S. at 679). First, the court 
discounts legal conclusions and “[t]hreadbare recitals of the elements of a cause of action, 
supported by mere conclusory statements[.]” /gbal, 556 U.S. at 678. The court is also 
““not bound to accept as true a legal conclusion couched as a factual allegation[.]’” Jd. 
(citation omitted). Second, the court considers whether the factual allegations, taken as 
true, “plausibly give rise to an entitlement to relief.” Jd. at 679. This second step is fact- 
bound and context-specific, requiring the court “to draw on its judicial experience and 
common sense.” /d. The court does not “weigh the evidence” or “evaluate the likelihood” 
that a plaintiffs claims will prevail. Christiansen v. Omnicom Grp., Inc., 852 F.3d 195, 
201 (2d Cir. 2017). 
     In Counts J, II, and III of the SFAC, Plaintiff asserts § 1983 claims for 
deprivations of liberty and property interests protected by procedural and substantive due

process. 
      C.     Whether the SFAC States a Procedural Due Process Liberty Interest 
            Claim. 
      To state a claim for a “constitutionally cognizable deprivation of liberty without 
sufficient process[,]” a plaintiff must assert “(1) that [he or] she possessed a cognizable 
liberty interest, and (2) that the defendants deprived [him or] her of that same liberty 
without providing process adequate to justify their actions.” Velez v. Levy, 401 F.3d 75, 
87 (2d Cir. 2005). Generally, “{a] person’s interest in his or her good reputation alone, 
apart from a more tangible interest, is not a liberty or property interest sufficient to 
invoke the procedural protections of the Due Process Clause or create a cause of action 
under § 1983.” Patterson v. City of Utica, 370 F.3d 322, 329-30 (2d Cir. 2004). The 
“stigma plus” doctrine, however, “provides a remedy for government defamation under 
federal constitutional law” when it occurs concurrently with the loss of a tangible interest. 
Sadallah v. City of Utica, 383 F.3d 34, 38 (2d Cir. 2004). 
      To prevail on a “stigma plus” claim, a plaintiff must show (1) the utterance 
      of a statement sufficiently derogatory to injure his or her reputation, that is 
      capable of being proved false, and that he or she claims is false, and (2) a 
      material state-imposed burden or state-imposed alteration of the plaintiff's 
      status or rights. 
Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). “While there is ‘no rigid requirement that both the 
‘stigma’ and the ‘plus’ must issue from the same government actor or at the same time,’ 
they must be ‘sufficiently proximate.’” Mudge v. Zugalla, 939 F.3d 72, 80 (2d Cir. 2019) 
(alteration adopted) (quoting Velez, 401 F.3d at 89). 
      “{D]eleterious effects which flow directly from a sullied reputation [are] normally 
... insufficient” to “satisf[y] the ‘plus’ prong” of a stigma plus claim, including “the 
impact that defamation might have on job prospects, or, for that matter, romantic 
aspirations, friendships, self-esteem, or any other typical consequence of a bad 
reputation.” Valmonte v. Bane, 18 F.3d 992, 1001 (2d Cir. 1994). Courts, however, have 
found the “‘deprivation of a plaintiff's property’ or the ‘termination of a plaintiff's 
government employment’” to be burdens sufficient to satisfy the stigma plus standard. 
Mudge, 939 F.3d at 80 (quoting Sadallah, 383 F.3d at 38).

     A plaintiff must “first show that the government made stigmatizing statements 
about him” because the statements “call into question [the] plaintiffs good name, 
reputation, honor, or integrity[,]” or “denigrate the employee’s competence as a 
professional and impugn the employee’s professional reputation in such a fashion as to 
effectively put a significant roadblock in that employee’s continued ability to practice his 
or her profession.” Patterson, 370 F.3d at 330 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
Plaintiff satisfies this prong by citing the Investigative Report’s statements that he 
discriminated against Lydia Clemmons, PhD, based on gender and race and accusing him 
of conducting his law enforcement activities in a racist manner.” He further plausibly 
alleges that Mr. Christie and Ms. Yang intentionally made these stigmatizing statements 
public. See id. (requiring a plaintiff “only to raise the falsity of these stigmatizing 
statements as an issue, not prove they are false” and must also “prove these stigmatizing 
statements were made public”). Plaintiff has thus plausibly alleged “stigma” under the 
first prong of the stigma-plus test. 
     With regard to the second prong, Plaintiff plausibly alleges that he has suffered 
reputational damage by having allegedly confidential investigative material published in 
his community. He claims that, as a result, he suffered a de facto demotion at the 
Vermont State Police (the “VSP”) in light of his diminished duties and reduced income, 
and he has further lost a position at the University of Vermont Medical Center. See Velez, 
401 F.3d at 88-89 (citing with approval and joining other Circuits that stigma and plus 
need not derive from the same source provided there is temporal proximity). At the 
pleading stage, this is sufficient to plead that Mr. Christie and Ms. Yang publicly made 
false, stigmatizing statements about him that created a government-imposed “alteration of 
status . .  . in addition to the stigmatizing statement.” Sadallah, 383 F.3d at 38 (internal 
quotation marks omitted); see also Baden v. Koch, 799 F.2d 825, 831 (2d Cir. 1986) 

 In a Summary Order, the Second Circuit addressed whether the term “racist” was an opinion 
because “[u]nlike the Federal Constitution, the New York Constitution provides for absolute 
protection of opinions.” Cooper v. Franklin Templeton Invs., 2023 WL 3882977, at *4 (2d Cir. 
June 8, 2023) (internal quotation marks omitted). Based on the context in which the statement 
was made in that case, the court concluded it was.

(holding that plaintiff who was demoted to deputy chief medical executive from chief 
medical executive asserted a liberty interest, albeit a “weak” one, for purposes of his 
stigma plus claim). 
     Although Plaintiff alleges that the stigmatizing statements were made by the 
VHRC Defendants and the change in his employment was imposed by his employer, the 
VSP, both are “arms” of the State of Vermont and “perfect parity in the origin of both the 
‘stigma’ and the ‘plus’ is not required to state the infringement of a ‘stigma-plus’ liberty 
interest.” Velez, 401 F.3d at 89 (“[E]ven where a  ‘stigma’ and ‘plus’ are not imposed by 
the same actor, a stigma-plus claim may be valid if the ‘stigma’ and ‘plus’ were 
connected.”’). 
     In Velez, however, the Second Circuit imposed a  final burden that Plaintiff has not 
overcome. It held that a plaintiff cannot maintain a stigma plus claim against defendants 
who made stigmatizing statements but lacked “the power to provide process to the 
plaintiff.” Zd. at 93. 
     In this case, although Plaintiff alleges that the VHRC Defendants’ statements in 
the Investigative Report altered the terms and conditions of his employment, he fails to 
plausibly allege that the VHRC Defendants had the legal authority to bring about a 
change in his employment or offer due process to him. Stated differently, because Mr. 
Christie and Ms. Yang “had no legal authority to bring about [the plaintiffs] ouster” or 
demotion, they could not “be held legally accountable for the alleged process failure.” Jd. 
To the extent that Plaintiff alleges Mr. Christie “refused to provide [him] an opportunity 
to meet with [the VJHRC to discuss clearing his name” after the alleged deprivation, he 
does not allege how a name clearing would have altered his VSP employment status or 
duties. (Doc. 58-4 at 46, { 113.) In an amended complaint, Plaintiff may seek to explain 
this causal relationship and the alleged remedies Mr. Christie and Ms. Yang could have 
provided him. At this juncture, he has not done so. 
     Because Plaintiff fails to adequately allege a procedural due process liberty 
interest claim against Mr. Christie and Ms. Yang in their individual capacities, Count I of 
the SFAC is DISMISSED.

     D.     Whether the SFAC States a Procedural Due Process Property Interest 
           Claim. 
     Plaintiff's procedural due process claim alleging deprivation of a property interest 
fails for the same reason as his stigma plus claim. “A procedural due process claim is 
composed of two elements: (1) the existence of a property or liberty interest that was 
deprived and (2) deprivation of that interest without due process.” Bryant v. New York 
State Educ. Dep’t, 692 F.3d 202, 218 (2d Cir. 2012). 
     Plaintiff points to no authority for a procedural due process claim against an entity 
which cannot provide due process before or after the deprivation of a constitutionally 
protected property interest. To the contrary, under Velez, Plaintiff cannot maintain a 
procedural due process claim against Mr. Christie or Ms. Yang without plausibly alleging 
that they had the power to provide the process sought or reverse the VSP’s demotion 
decision. See Velez, 401 F.3d at 93 (dismissing procedural due process claim against 
defendants without power to impose deprivation or provide process to plaintiff); see also 
Cleveland Bad. of Educ. v. Loudermill, 470 U.S. 532, 543 (1985) (evaluating whether 
process provided a “meaningful opportunity to invoke the discretion of the 
decisionmaker’”) (emphasis supplied). Because the SFAC fails to plausibly allege that 
either Mr. Christie or Ms. Yang may be held liable for a procedural due process violation 
stemming from the deprivation of Plaintiff's property interest in his state employment, 
the court DISMISSES Count II as to Mr. Christie and Ms. Yang in their individual 
capacities. 
     E.     Whether the SFAC States a Substantive Due Process Claim. 
     Although a  stigma-plus liberty interest is an actionable theory of relief on a 
procedural due process claim, it is not a fundamental right protected by substantive due 
process. For this reason, “a ‘stigma-plus’ claim is only actionable as a procedural due 
process claim, not as a substantive due process claim.” Hogan v. City of Fort Walton 
Beach, 817 F. App’x 717, 723 (11th Cir. 2020) (internal quotation marks omitted); see 
also Segal v. City of New York, 459 F.3d 207, 213 (2d Cir. 2006) (“[S]tigma plus is a 
species within the phylum of procedural due process claims[.]”); Doe v. Mich. Dep’t of

State Police, 490 F.3d 491, 502 (6th Cir. 2007) (“The stigma-plus test is used to 
determine whether state action violates an individual’s procedural due process rights. Our 
review of the caselaw has failed to identify any case that applies the stigma-plus test to a 
substantive due process claim.”) (citation omitted). 
     “The first step in [a] substantive due process analysis is to identify the 
constitutional right at stake.” Hurd v. Fredenburgh, 984 F.3d 1075, 1087 (2d Cir. 2021), 
cert. denied, 142 S. Ct. 109 (2021) (quoting Kaluczky v. City of White Plains, 57 F.3d 
202, 211 (2d Cir.  1995)). “Next, the plaintiff must demonstrate that the state action was 
SO egregious, so outrageous, that it may fairly be said to shock the contemporary 
conscience.” /d. (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Southerland v. City of New 
York, 680 F.3d 127, 151-52 (2d Cir. 2012)). “The interference with the plaintiff s 
protected right must be so shocking, arbitrary, and egregious that the Due Process Clause 
would not countenance it even were it accompanied by full procedural protection.” Jd. 
(internal quotation marks omitted). 
     “Substantive due process protects only those interests that are “implicit in the 
concept of ordered liberty.’” Loc. 342, Long Island Pub. Serv. Emps. v. Town Bd. of 
Town of Huntington, 31 F.3d 1191, 1196 (2d Cir. 1994). Beyond the rights guaranteed by 
the first eight Amendments, “[{t]he protections of substantive due process have for the 
most part been accorded to matters relating to marriage, family, procreation, and the right 
to bodily integrity.” Albright v. Oliver, 510 U.S. 266, 272 (1994). Under the doctrine of 
judicial self-restraint, courts must “exercise the utmost care” when defining or developing 
rights in this area. Collins v. City of Harker Heights, Tex., 503 U.S. 115, 125 (1992). 
     Courts have declined to recognize continued public employment as a fundamental 
right protected by substantive due process. See, e.g., Nicholas v. Penn. State Univ., 227 
F.3d 133, 142 (3d Cir. 2000) (holding that plaintiff's “tenured public employment” was 
not “a fundamental property interest entitled to substantive due process protection” and 
noting that the court “thereby join[s] the great majority of courts of appeals that have 
addressed this issue”); Leach v. City of Newburgh, 2018 WL 6411360, at *6 (S.D.N.Y. 
Dec. 6, 2018) (collecting cases and observing that “[t]he right to continued public

employment, however, is not a cognizable interest that is accorded the protection of 
substantive due process”); Mathirampuzha v. Potter, 2010 WL 55061, at *9 (D. Conn. 
Jan. 4, 2010) (“The Second Circuit has never articulated a fundamental interest in public 
employment giving rise to substantive due process protection, and many other courts 
have explicitly declared that public employment is not protected by substantive due 
process.”). The Supreme Court has further observed that: 
     [b]ecause the Due Process Clause does not purport to supplant traditional 
     tort law in laying down rules of conduct to regulate liability for injuries that 
     attend living together in society, [the Court] ha[s] previously rejected 
     claims that the Due Process Clause should be interpreted to impose federal 
     duties that are analogous to those traditionally imposed by state tort law[.] 
Collins, 503 U.S. at 128. 
     Plaintiff's alleged interest in the loss of his reputation is arguably analogous to the 
interest protected by Vermont’s defamation law. Allowing Plaintiff to assert a substantive 
due process claim for harm to his reputation could potentially “constitutionalize broad 
swaths of state tort law.” Boyanowski v. Cap. Area Intermediate Unit, 215 F.3d 396, 404 
(3d Cir. 2000) (“If [plaintiff's] claim can survive, the same could be said for any number 
of mundane state tort cases that lack a clear constitutional basis.”); see also Schultz v. Inc. 
Vill.  of Bellport, 2010 WL 3924751, at *7 (E.D.N.Y. Sept. 30, 2010), aff'd, 479 F. App’x 
358 (2d Cir. 2012) (“[B]ecause the Supreme Court has cautioned against expansion of the 
scope of substantive due process rights, courts are reluctant to convert employment 
related defamation claims into substantive due process claims.”) (citation omitted). 
     The strongest argument in favor of recognizing Plaintiffs substantive due process 
claim is that in Velez, the Second Circuit recognized a claim on this basis. It ruled that 
public officials may not “intentionally and maliciously fabricate[] and disseminate[] 
falsehoods” with “no legitimate purpose” and for no reason other than “to deprive [a 
public employee] of her job[,]” “oppress her,” and “cause her injury.” Velez, 401 F.3d at 
94. Although it found that the claim was more properly characterized as a  First 
Amendment violation, in doing so, the Velez court made the following observations: 
     We tend to speak of that which shocks the conscience largely in the context 

                                     10 

     of excessive force claims. But it can apply to other areas of government 
     activity as well. The measure of what is conscience-shocking is no 
     calibrated yard stick. Nevertheless, malicious and sadistic abuses of power 
     by government officials, intended to oppress or to cause injury and 
     designed for no legitimate government purpose, unquestionably shock the 
     conscience. This is so because our constitutional notion of due process rests 
     on the bedrock principle that we must protect the individual against . . . the 
     exercise of power without any reasonable justification in the service of a 
     legitimate governmental objective. 
     Here, the pleadings allege that the board member defendants, together with 
     the Chancellor and the investigators, intentionally and maliciously 
     fabricated and disseminated falsehoods in a common effort to deprive the 
     plaintiff of her job—and of her opportunity to represent her constituents. It 
     is further asserted that they did this for no reason other than to oppress her 
     and to cause her injury, and that their project had no legitimate purpose. If 
     these purported facts are proven, the defendants’ conduct might well be 
     sufficiently arbitrary and outrageous, in a constitutional sense, to make out 
     a valid substantive due process claim. 
Id. at 93-94 (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
     At the pleading stage, Plaintiff has plausibly alleged that the Investigative Report 
is a detailed, comprehensive confidential document containing information provided as 
evidence to the VHRC in  its investigation. He further alleges the VHRC Defendants 
maliciously disclosed the Investigative Report in an effort to gratuitously tarnish his 
reputation and threaten his employment without any “legitimate government purpose.” 
Td. at 94. Plaintiff alleges that Mr. Christie and Ms. Yang deliberately violated state law 
in an effort to “shape public opinion, self-promote politically, indict VSP troopers in the 
court of public opinion[,] .  .  . [and] damag[e] their names, reputations and careers|. ]” 
(Doc. 58-4 at 68, § 152.) Finally, he has alleged that Mr. Christie’s and Ms. Yang’s 
release of the Investigative Report to Seven Days was the direct and proximate cause of 
his damages. Accepting Plaintiff's allegations as true, as the court must, although a  close 
question, Plaintiff has plausibly alleged a substantive due process claim sufficient to 
withstand a motion to dismiss. 
           F.     Whether the Court Erred in Analyzing Plaintiff’s Defamation 
                 and Invasion of Privacy Claims. 
     The VHRC Defendants argue the court erred in considering conduct by Mr. 
                                     11 

Christie and Ms. Yang related to the VHRC’s investigation, decision-making, or Final 
Determination in analyzing whether Plaintiff plausibly alleged actual malice. 
      “[W ]hether actual malice can plausibly be inferred will depend on the facts and 
circumstances of each case.” Biro v. Conde Nast, 807 F.3d 541, 545 (2d Cir. 2015). 
Evidence of an ulterior motive can “bolster an inference of actual malice” and thus the 
relationships between the parties is a relevant consideration. Duffy v. Leading Edge 
Prods., Inc., 44 F.3d 308, 315 n.10 (Sth Cir. 1995); see also Zeigler v. Rater, 939 F.3d 
385, 397 (1st Cir. 2019) (“Generally speaking, actual malice may be inferred from the 
parties’ relationship and the circumstances surrounding the publication.”). As a result, 
while Mr. Christie and Ms. Yang may be immune for their investigative and adjudicative 
conduct, that conduct remains relevant to whether Plaintiff has plausibly alleged actual 
malice. See Biro, 807 F.3d at 545-46 (“[D]istrict courts in and out of our Circuit have 
inferred actual malice at the pleading stage from allegations that referred to the nature 
and circumstances of the alleged defamation or previous dealings with the defendant.”). 
     Because the VHRC Defendants’ motion for reconsideration of the court’s analysis 
of Plaintiff s defamation and invasion of privacy claims is merely an attempt to relitigate 
an issue the court has decided, their request for reconsideration of these claims is 
DENIED. 
      G.    The VHRC Defendants’ Motion for a Certificate of Appealability and 
            Plaintiff's Motion to Certify Mr. Christie’s and Ms. Yang’s Appeal as 
            Frivolous. 
     If the court denies their motion for reconsideration with regard to Plaintiffs 
§ 1983 claims, the VHRC Defendants ask the court in the alternative to enter an order 
certifying its qualified immunity decision for interlocutory appeal. Plaintiff opposes the 
certification for interlocutory appeal and asks the court to instead certify the appeal as 
frivolous. 
      “[A] district court’s denial of a claim of qualified immunity, to the extent that it 
turns on an issue of law, is an appealable ‘final decision’ within the meaning of 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1291 notwithstanding the absence of a final judgment.” Mitchell v. Forsyth, 472 U.S. 

                                      12 

511, 530 (1985). Ifa district court’s qualified immunity decision “turns on questions of 
evidence sufficiency alone (i.e., which alleged facts a party may, or may not, be able to 
prove at trial), it is not immediately appealable.” Nat’! Rifle Ass’n of Am. v.  Vullo, 49 
F 4th 700, 712 (2d Cir. 2022). 
     Even where a  district court finds that genuine issues of fact exist, however, “there 
is appellate jurisdiction over that defendant’s interlocutory appeal if the defendant 
contests the existence of a dispute or the materiality as a matter of law, or contends that 
he is entitled to qualified immunity even under the plaintiff's version of the facts.” Jd. 
Where a defendant accepts a  plaintiff's facts as alleged, the Second Circuit has 
recognized that “whether the plaintiff sufficiently pleaded the violation of a constitutional 
right” and “whether, at the time of the alleged violation, the defendant’s actions, as 
alleged by the plaintiff, violated clearly established law” are “strictly legal’ questions 
reviewable on interlocutory appeal[.|” Jd. 
     Accepting the facts as alleged by Plaintiff as true, the VHRC Defendants 
acknowledge for purposes of their appeal that the release of the Investigative Report 
violated Vermont law and was done maliciously to injure Plaintiff's reputation. They 
nonetheless contend that a question of law remains regarding whether the release of the 
Investigative Report violated clearly established law.* Under the Second Circuit’s recent 
decision in National Rifle Association of America v.  Vullo, the VHRC Defendants’ 
acceptance of the facts as alleged in the SFAC removes the barrier to interlocutory appeal 
posed by the parties’ factual disputes. 49 F.4th at 712. The court thus GRANTS the 
VHRC Defendants’ request to pursue an interlocutory appeal. 

3 Under Velez v. Levy, the right to be free from “malicious and sadistic abuses of power by 
government officials, intended to oppress or to cause injury and designed for no legitimate 
government purpose, unquestionably shock[s] the conscience[,]” and is arguably well- 
established. 401 F.3d 75, 94 (2d Cir. 2005) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
                                     13 

      Because the VHRC’s arguments are not frivolous, the court denies Plaintiff's 
request to certify them as such. Plaintiff's motion for certification of the appeal as 
frivolous is therefore DENIED.* 
                               CONCLUSION 
      For the foregoing reasons, the VHRC Defendants’ motion for reconsideration is 
GRANTED IN PART AND DENIED IN PART (Doc. 68). Plaintiff's 42 U.S.C. § 1983 
procedural due process liberty and property claims (Counts I and II) are DISMISSED 
WITHOUT PREJUDICE as to Mr. Christie and Ms. Yang in their individual capacities. 
Plaintiffs § 1983 substantive due process claim (Count IID) is not dismissed. The VHRC 
Defendants’ motion for a certificate of appealability is GRANTED. Plaintiff's motion for 
certification of Mr. Christie’s and Ms. Yang’s appeal as frivolous is DENIED (Doc. 77). 
SO ORDERED.                                             
      Dated at Burlington, in the District of Vermont, this  Ai  day of June, 2023. 

                                                Christina Reiss, District    Judge 
                                                United States District Court 

4 Plaintiff cites several decisions from other district courts in the Second Circuit in which the 
court applied a “dual jurisdiction” rule to “certify as ‘frivolous’ an appeal from a denial of 
qualified immunity if the denial was based on a  factual dispute.” Kistner v. City of Buffalo, 2023 
WL 21219, at *4 (W.D.N.Y. Jan. 3, 2023) (declining to apply the dual jurisdiction rule due to the 
Second Circuit’s silence on the practice). The Second Circuit has not endorsed this practice. 
                                      14