UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                                              
EASTERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                                              
------------------------------------------------------------ x            
MADELAINE CHOCOLATE NOVELTIES, INC.                                       
D/B/A THE MADELAINE CHOCOLATE                                             
COMPANY,                                                                  
                  Plaintiff,                                            
                                      MEMORANDUM & ORDER                
             - against -              1:15-CV-5830 (RJD)                

GREAT NORTHERN INSURANCE COMPANY,                                         
                  Defendant.                                            
------------------------------------------------------------ x            
DEARIE, District Judge                                                    
   In October 2012, Hurricane Sandy made landfall in New York City and inflicted 
significant damage across the region. The facilities of the Madelaine Chocolate Company, 
located on the Rockaway Peninsula, three blocks from the Atlantic Ocean and one block from 
Jamaica Bay, were inundated with several feet of storm surge pushed ashore by Sandy’s 80-mile-
an-hour winds. All told, Madelaine claims more than $50 million in physical and economic 
losses caused by Sandy. Madelaine sought coverage for these losses from Great Northern 
Insurance Company, which had in 2011 issued to Madelaine an “all-risks” insurance policy (the 
“Policy”). Great Northern paid out $4 million to Madelaine but declined to pay the remaining 
amount, reasoning that the rest of the claimed losses were excluded from coverage under the 
Policy’s Flood Exclusion.1                                                

1 The Flood Exclusion reads, in relevant part:                            

   This insurance does not apply to loss or damage caused by or resulting from: 
   waves, tidal water or tidal waves; or rising, overflowing or breaking of any 
   boundary, of any . . . oceans or any other body of water or watercourse, 
   whether driven by wind or not, regardless of any other cause or event that 
   directly or indirectly: contributes concurrently to; or contributes in any 
   sequence to, the loss or damage, even if such other cause or event would 
   otherwise be covered.                                                
   In 2015, Madelaine initiated this action against Great Northern seeking damages for the 
insurer’s non-payment of the total claimed losses, arguing that the Policy’s Windstorm 
Provision2 provided coverage for damage caused by wind-driven Sandy storm surge, in spite of 
the Flood Exclusion. After two rounds of summary judgment and a trip to the Second Circuit,3 in 

July 2022, the Court presided over a week-long jury trial. After the close of its case-in-chief, 
Madelaine moved for judgment as a matter of law, which the Court denied. The jury then 
returned a verdict in favor of Great Northern on liability and did not reach the issue of damages.  
   Madelaine now renews its motion for judgment as a matter of law, pursuant to Rule 
50(b), or, alternatively, seeks a new trial pursuant to Rule 59. For the reasons that follow, the 
motion is denied in its entirety.                                         
I.   MOTION FOR JUDGMENT AS A MATTER OF LAW                             
   Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 50 allows a court to set aside a jury’s verdict if “a 
reasonable jury would not have a legally sufficient evidentiary basis to find” as it did. FED. R. 
CIV. P. 50(a)(1). In reviewing a Rule 50 motion, the court “must draw all reasonable inferences 

in favor of the nonmoving party, and it may not make credibility determinations or weigh the 
evidence.” Cross v. N.Y.C. Trans. Auth., 417 F.3d 241, 247 (2d Cir. 2005) (quoting Reeves v. 

2 The Windstorm Provision (referred to by Madelaine as the “Windstorm Endorsement” and by 
Great Northern as the “Windstorm Deductible Endorsement”) reads, in relevant part:  

   Windstorm means: wind; [or] wind-driven rain; . . . regardless of any other 
   cause or event that directly or indirectly: contributes concurrently to; or 
   contributes in any sequence to, the loss or damage, even if such other cause 
   or event would otherwise be covered.                                 

3 The Court assumes readers’ familiarity with the lengthy background of this case, described in 
detail in prior decisions of this Court and of the Second Circuit. See Madelaine Chocolate 
Novelties v. Great N. Ins. Co., 399 F. Supp. 3d 3 (E.D.N.Y. 2019); Madelaine Chocolate 
Novelties v. Great N. Ins. Co., 752 Fed. Appx. 47 (2d Cir. 2018).         
Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 150 (2000)). A party seeking Rule 50 relief after 
the jury has deliberated and returned its verdict, as Madelaine does, bears a “particularly heavy” 
burden. Id. at 248. A court only may grant a Rule 50(b) motion for judgment as a matter of law 
notwithstanding the jury’s verdict if there is “such a complete absence of evidence supporting the 

verdict that the jury’s findings could only have been the result of sheer surmise and conjecture, 
or the evidence in favor of the movant is so overwhelming that reasonable and fair minded 
persons could not arrive at a verdict against it.” Wiercinski v. Mangia 57, Inc., 787 F. 3d 106, 
112 (2d Cir. 2015) (cleaned up).                                          
   Madelaine purports to meet this high standard, arguing that Great Northern failed to meet 
its burden to present sufficient extrinsic evidence to prove that Madelaine intended and 
understood that the Flood Exclusion barred coverage for storm surge losses, despite the language 
of the Windstorm Provision. The Court is not convinced and concludes that the evidence 
presented at trial could permit a reasonable jury to find that Madelaine understood and intended 
that storm surge losses would not be covered under the Policy. For instance, two Madelaine 

executives testified that, in 2001, the company decided to discontinue the $2.5 million in excess 
flood coverage it had purchased from Great Northern for years. See ECF 206-3 at 157:5-13; 
158:10-19 (testimony of Jorge Farber, Madelaine’s CEO); ECF 206-5 at 570:8-571:5 (testimony 
of Norman Gold, Madelaine’s Vice President). It would be reasonable to infer that, having 
terminated its excess flood coverage from Great Northern, Madelaine understood that its 
remaining all-risks Policy from the carrier—which included a Flood Exclusion—would not 
protect it against flood-related damage, including wind-driven flood. While Madelaine’s decision 
to terminate excess “flood” coverage is not dispositive as to whether the company intended to 
terminate “storm surge” coverage, it is certainly at least relevant to the company’s general 
understanding of its protection against water-related hazards, even if the pre-2001 policies used 
different language in the Windstorm Provision than the 2011 Policy. Likewise, an email received 
in evidence at trial revealed that, in 2011, when Madelaine was asked by a client to disclose its 
“flood coverage” for its facilities, Madelaine listed only its $3 million in coverage from the 

National Flood Insurance Program. See ECF 206-14 at 4; ECF 206-4 at 472:15-473:5. 
Madelaine’s decision not to list Great Northern as a provider of flood coverage could logically 
have been relied on by the jury to conclude that Madelaine knew and understood that its Great 
Northern Policy excluded coverage for damage caused by any water that might inundate the 
company’s facilities, whether driven by wind or not. Based on these facts and others from the 
trial record, there is not a complete absence of evidence supporting the jury’s verdict in Great 
Northern’s favor. Cf Wiercinski, 787 F. 3d at 112. Madelaine’s Rule 50(b) motion fails. 
   In addition to the parties’ differing positions as to whether the trial record supports the 
jury’s verdict as a factual matter, the post-trial briefs bicker about the issue to be resolved at the 
trial as a legal matter. Madelaine apparently takes the position that Great Northern could rely 

only on extrinsic evidence—to the exclusion of the Policy’s text—to meet its burden of proving 
that both parties understood that storm surge losses were not covered. See ECF 203-1 at 19 
(asserting that “Great Northern was obligated to introduce cognizable extrinsic evidence, outside 
the four corners of the Policy,” to prove its case) (emphasis added); ECF 207 at 7 (commenting 
that Great Northern should not invoke the Policy’s language to oppose the present Rule 50(b) 
motion because this “by definition, is not extrinsic evidence”). The Court finds Madelaine’s 
position questionable. The Court’s instructions to the jury on the law governing the case—to 
which Madelaine did not object—explained that the language of an insurance policy is “[t]he 
best evidence of the parties’ intent,” and that the jury should consider the parties’ written Policy 
alongside the extrinsic evidence that was presented during the trial, including “the relationship 
between the parties, what was said and done by the parties, and all the surrounding events and 
circumstances,” to determine the intent of the parties at the time of contracting. ECF 199 at 8-9. 
Indeed, Madelaine’s proposed jury instructions did not elevate the role of extrinsic evidence over 
the text of the Policy in describing the jury’s task.4 Based on the Court’s instructions of the law, 

it was entirely permissible—indeed, it was critical—for the jury to consider the Policy’s 
language in arriving at its verdict. And the Policy’s language provides additional support for the 
jury’s conclusion that both parties intended that the Flood Exclusion apply to all flood-related 
damage, even if such damage was also caused by a windstorm.5              
   The Rule 50(b) motion is denied.                                     
II.  MOTION FOR NEW TRIAL                                               
   Having denied Madelaine’s Rule 50(b) motion, the Court addresses Madelaine’s 
alternative argument that it is entitled to a new trial on liability pursuant to Rule 59. Although 
Rule 59 permits a court to grant a new trial “for any reason for which a new trial has heretofore 
been granted in an action at law in federal court,” the Second Circuit has warned that a jury’s 

verdict should rarely be disturbed and that a motion for a new trial should only be granted if the 

4 Madelaine asked the Court to instruct the jury as follows: “The best evidence of the [parties’] 
intent is typically the language used in the insurance policy. . . . Where the language is 
ambiguous, however, the parties may present extrinsic evidence (i.e., evidence other than the 
policy language) regarding the relationship of the parties, the sale of the insurance, and the 
surrounding circumstances in an attempt to establish the intent of the parties at the time of 
contracting and resolve the ambiguity. To the extent you believe that the extrinsic evidence 
presented bears on whether the Flood Exclusion does or does not apply to wind-driven storm 
surge losses, you may consider such evidence subject to the following rules . . . ” ECF 177 at 27. 

5 See Madelaine, 399 F. Supp. 3d at 11 (“Giving all of the relevant language in the Policy’s 
coverage-granting clauses force and effect . . . where there is a windstorm and an excluded cause 
[like a flood], the Windstorm Definition’s ACC clause would be inapplicable and the 
exclusionary phrases direct the reader to the Policy’s relevant exclusions.”).  
verdict was “seriously erroneous or a miscarriage of justice.” Farrior v. Waterford Bd. of Educ., 
277 F.3d 633, 635 (2d Cir. 2002).                                         
   The Court denies Madelaine’s request to overturn the jury’s verdict here. As explained 
above, the evidence presented at trial, including the language of the Policy and the extrinsic 

evidence, can reasonably be interpreted to conclude that both parties intended for the Policy not 
to cover losses caused by storm surge. Accordingly, the jury’s verdict in Great Northern’s favor 
was not against the clear weight of the evidence. Madelaine’s Rule 59 motion on this basis fails. 
Cf. ECF 203-1 at 25-26.                                                   
   Nor is a new trial warranted based on the Court’s evidentiary rulings. Madelaine asserts 
that the Court “erroneously allowed the introduction of two types of highly prejudicial evidence 
(and resulting argument) over Madelaine’s objection,” which confused and prejudiced the jury to 
Madelaine’s detriment. ECF 203-1 at 8. Madelaine’s two evidentiary complaints are similar. 
Taking its second argument first, Madelaine claims that it was prejudiced by the Court’s decision 
to permit Great Northern’s witnesses to testify about their subjective understandings as to the 

Policy’s meaning, when those interpretations were not communicated to Madelaine at the time of 
contracting. See ECF 203-1 at 30-31. Madelaine’s other evidentiary concern is a variation on this 
theme: Madelaine laments that the Court permitted Great Northern witnesses to testify that, in 
their view of the Policy, the Windstorm Provision applied solely to the applicability of a 
deductible, an interpretation that, Madelaine claims, contravenes the Second Circuit’s earlier 
ruling in this case that the Windstorm Provision applied to the entire Policy. See id. at 27-30.  
   As discussed on the record at trial, the Court disagrees that either of these evidentiary 
decisions were erroneous. In any event, the Court’s instructions cured any potential concern that 
the jury was misled by the evidence Madelaine complains of. The Court instructed the jury that 
“Great Northern’s intent or understanding that was not communicated to Madelaine would have 
no bearing on Madelaine’s intent or understanding; only intent indicated by words and acts that 
were made known to the other party may be considered . . . [in deciding] whether or not Great 
Northern has proven by a preponderance of the evidence that both parties understood and 

intended that the insurance policy would not cover losses caused by storm surge.” ECF 199 at 9. 
This instruction warned the jury that any subjective opinions professed by Great Northern’s 
witnesses as to the meaning of the Policy generally, or as to the role of the Windstorm Provision 
specifically, should not be considered unless communicated by word or action to Madelaine, and 
we assume that the jury followed these instructions with care in rendering its verdict. See Zafiro 
v. United States, 506 U.S. 534, 540 (1993) (“[E]ven if there were some risk of prejudice, here it 
is of the type that can be cured with proper instructions, and ‘juries are presumed to follow their 
instructions.’” (quoting Richardson v. Marsh, 481 U.S. 200, 211 (1987))). Accordingly, the 
jury’s verdict was not “seriously erroneous,” and will not be disturbed.  
                         CONCLUSION                                     

   For the foregoing reasons, Madelaine’s motion is denied.             

SO ORDERED.                                                               
Dated:  Brooklyn, New York              /s/ Raymond J. Dearie             
   January 20, 2023                   RAYMOND J. DEARIE                 
                                      United States District Judge

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                                              
EASTERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                                              
---------------------------------------------------------------- x        
MADELAINE CHOCOLATE NOVELTIES, INC.,  :                                   
                              :                                      
               Plaintiff,       :                                    
                              :      MEMORANDUM &                    
-against-                     :      ORDER                           
                              :      15-CV-5830 (RJD) (SMG)          
GREAT NORTHERN INSURANCE CO.,      :                                      
                              :                                      
               Defendant.     :                                      
---------------------------------------------------------------- x        
GOLD, STEVEN M., U.S. Magistrate Judge:                                   

On June 11, 2020, Jones Day—one of the law firms representing plaintiff Madelaine 
Chocolate Novelties, Inc. (“Madelaine”)—moved for leave to withdraw as counsel for plaintiff.  
Mot. to Withdraw as Attorney, Dkt. 115.  At that time, it appeared that Madelaine might object 
and that resolution of the motion would require the intervention of the Court.  Accordingly, 
although the motion was filed ex parte and in camera, the Court asked plaintiff to explain why 
the motion papers submitted by Jones Day should not be publicly filed in their entirety or with 
redactions.  See Order dated June 11, 2020.                               
Since that time, Jones Day and plaintiff have reached agreement with respect to Jones 
Day’s motion for leave to withdraw, subject to the Court’s ruling that the motion papers remain 
under seal.  At the Court’s request, Madelaine has submitted a declaration of its Chief 
Administrative Officer setting forth the reasons why Madelaine contends it would be prejudiced 
by public disclosure of the motion papers.  Decl. of Scott Wright, Dkt. 121-1.  Madelaine has 
also proposed redactions to those papers it asks the Court to permit if public disclosure is 
required. Proposed Redactions, Dkt. 121-2 and 121-3.  Because, as set forth below, I conclude 
that Jones Day’s motion papers are not judicial documents and may properly remain under seal, I 
do not consider the proposed redactions.                                  
Now that Madelaine and Jones Day have agreed to the terms of  Jones Day’s withdrawal 
(subject to a ruling that  Jones Day’s motion papers may remain sealed), there is no longer a 
contested matter for the Court to decide.  Because there is no pending dispute, the motion papers 
are not at this point “judicial documents” to which the public has a right of access.  See, e.g., 
United States v. Amodeo, 71 F.3d 1044, 1050 (2d Cir. 1995); Giuffre v. Maxwell, 2020 WL 
133570, at *3 (S.D.N.Y. Jan 13, 2020).  Even when documents do enjoy a presumption of 
access, that presumption may be overcome by the privacy interests of the person or entity 
resisting disclosure.  Amodeo, 71 F.3d at 1050-51.  The declaration of Madelaine’s Chief 
Administrative Officer demonstrates that Madelaine would be prejudiced if the  Jones Day 
motion papers were publicly disclosed. 
 For the reasons stated above, the motions of Jones Day for leave to withdraw as counsel 
and of Madelaine that the motion papers described above remain under seal are granted. 
                               SO ORDERED. 
                                   Steven M. Gold 
                               Steven M. Gold 
                               United States Magistrate Judge 
Brooklyn, New York 
August 2, 2020 

U:\Madelaine withdrawal motion.docx

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                                              
EASTERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                                              
---------------------------------------------------------------- x        
MADELAINE CHOCOLATE NOVELTIES, INC.,  :                                   
                                  :                                      
                   Plaintiff,       :                                    
                                  :      MEMORANDUM &                    
    -against-                     :      ORDER                           
                                  :      15-CV-5830 (RJD) (SMG)          
GREAT NORTHERN INSURANCE CO.,      :                                      
                                  :                                      
                   Defendant.     :                                      
---------------------------------------------------------------- x        
GOLD, STEVEN M., U.S. Magistrate Judge:                                   

                         INTRODUCTION                                    
    Two discovery motions are currently pending before the Court.  In the first, defendant 
Great Northern Insurance Company (“Great Northern”) contests certain assertions of attorney-
client privilege by plaintiff Madelaine Chocolate Novelties, Inc. (“Madelaine”).  In the second, 
Great Northern seeks leave to serve two non-parties with subpoenas for documents.  This 
Memorandum and Order addresses each in turn.                              
                   ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE                             
    Great Northern’s letter motion dated January 13, 2020 contends that Madelaine 
improperly withheld documents on grounds of attorney-client privilege because the 
communications involved Madelaine’s employee Scott Wright, who was not an attorney at the 
time the communications took place.  Def. Ltr. dated Jan. 13, 2020, Dkt. 95.  It is undisputed that 
Mr. Wright graduated from law school in 1981 and worked as a law firm associate or in-house 
counsel until 1989.  Scott Wright LinkedIn Profile, Def. Ltr. dated Jan. 13, 2020, Ex. D, Dkt. 95-
4.  It is also undisputed that Wright held positions as a financial analyst and vice president for 
investor relations and did not practice law from 1990 until he was hired by Madelaine twelve 
years later, in 2002.  Id.  It appears that Wright allowed his membership in the New York State 
bar to expire in 1999, three years before he accepted a position with Madelaine.  Record of New 
York State Unified Court System, Def. Ltr. dated Jan. 13, 2020, Ex. E, Dkt. 95-5. 
    A party seeking to protect a communication from disclosure by invoking the attorney-
client privilege must generally establish that the communication was with a person who is a 

member of the bar of a court.  Gucci America, Inc. v. Guess?, Inc., 2011 WL 9375, at *1 
(S.D.N.Y. Jan. 3, 2011).  The question posed by Great Northern’s motion is whether 
communications with a law school graduate who practiced law years ago, but who was not a 
member of any bar at the time of the communications, may nevertheless be protected as 
privileged.                                                               
    The answer at least arguably depends on whether the case in which the privilege is 
asserted is governed by federal or New York state law.  One court, in a case governed by New 
York law, has held that an individual may assert the privilege with respect to communications 
with a person that the individual reasonably believed to be an attorney, but that a corporation 
such as Madelaine must demonstrate that it diligently investigated the attorney’s status before it 

may invoke the attorney-client privilege with respect to communications with someone who 
turns out not to be a member of a bar.  See Financial Technologies Int’l v. Smith, 2000 WL 
1855131, at *7 (S.D.N.Y. Dec. 19, 2000) (holding, under New York law, that “even if New York 
would apply the reasonable belief exception to individuals, corporations would have to make 
sure their attorneys are in fact attorneys”).  In Gucci America, however, the court questioned the 
holding in Financial Technologies and concluded that even a corporation may assert the 
attorney-client privilege with respect to communications with someone it reasonably believed to 
be an attorney but who in fact was not.  2011 WL 9375, at *5.  Gucci America, though, was 
decided under federal law, and its holding is therefore not in direct conflict with the one reached 

in Financial Technologies.                                                
    This is a diversity jurisdiction case involving a claim of breach of contract under New 
York law.  See generally Madelaine Chocolate Novelties, Inc. v. Great Northern Ins. Co., 752 F. 
App’x 47 (2d Cir. 2018).  Accordingly, questions of privilege are governed by New York law.  
F. R. Evid. 501.  As discussed above, the limited relevant case law leaves in doubt whether, 

under New York law, a corporation may successfully invoke privilege regarding its 
communications with someone it reasonably believes to be an attorney, or only as to 
communications with someone whose status as an attorney it has diligently investigated.  I need 
not resolve this question, though, because I conclude that Madelaine fails to satisfy even the 
lower of the two potentially applicable standards; that is, I conclude that Madelaine could not 
reasonably have believed that Scott Wright was an active member of the bar when it hired him in 
2002.                                                                     
    Norman Gold, a Madelaine Vice President, testified at a deposition of Madelaine 
conducted pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 30(b)(6) on March 26, 2019.  Gold Tr., Pl. Ltr. dated Jan. 
17, 2020, Ex. A, Dkt. 96-1.  At that deposition, Gold stated that Scott Wright is his brother-in-

law—and has been since before Madelaine hired Wright—and displayed general knowledge 
about Wright’s professional background.  Gold Tr. at 39:7–41:9.  Gold further testified that 
Wright was hired because Madelaine “had some administrative functions that needed direct 
supervision.”  Gold Tr. 41:10–13.  Scott Wright was deposed as well.  Wright Tr., Def. Ltr. dated 
Jan. 13, 2020, Ex. C, Dkt. 95-3; Def. Ltr. dated Feb. 3, 2020, Ex. 1, Dkt. 101.  Scott testified that 
his title upon being hired by Madelaine was “director of corporate development.”  Wright Tr. 
50:15–22.  Wright further testified that, although he initially also referred to himself as general 
counsel, he stopped and did not use “esquire” when signing his name.  Wright Tr. 25:9–26:3.  
Scott described his responsibilities after he was hired as “help[ing] with the way the systems 

inside the business, how do we operate, trying to create a little more discipline in this family 
business.”  Wright Tr. 51:18–22.  Wright currently serves as Madelaine’s chief administrative 
officer, a title he has held for approximately the past eight years.  Wright Tr. 51:24–52:5. 
    A party invoking the attorney-client privilege bears the burden of establishing that the 
privilege applies.  See Universal Standard Inc. v. Target Corp., 331 F.R.D. 80, 86 (S.D.N.Y. 

2019); Allied Irish Banks v. Bank of Am., N.A., 240 F.R.D. 96, 103 (S.D.N.Y. 2007).  Based upon 
the facts described above, I conclude that Madelaine has failed to meet its burden of proving that 
Madelaine reasonably believed that Wright was a member of the bar at the time of the 
communications in issue.                                                  
    When Wright was hired, Madelaine’s principal Norman Gold was his brother-in-law and 
generally familiar with Wright’s professional career.  To the extent Gold did not know of 
Wright’s professional experience, Madelaine almost certainly would have asked Wright for a 
resume or a list of the prior positions he had held.  It is accordingly reasonable to conclude that 
Madelaine knew when Wright was hired that he had not practiced law for more than a decade.  
Moreover, Wright was hired as a “director of corporate development,” and his responsibilities 

involved management rather than handling legal matters.  Although when he was first hired 
Wright referred to himself as general counsel, he stopped doing so at some point thereafter.  
Wright did not provide a date by which he stopped referring to himself as general counsel, but it 
is likely he did so well before the events at issue; Wright was hired in 2002, and Superstorm 
Sandy, which gave rise to this lawsuit, took place a decade later in 2012.  Finally, for the last 
eight years,  and since about the time of Sandy, Wright has held the title of chief administrative 
officer.                                                                  
    For the reasons stated above, Madelaine has failed to meet its burden to establish that it 
reasonably believed Wright was a practicing member of a bar at the time of the communications 

at issue.  Accordingly, Madelaine shall promptly identify any communications it has withheld on 
the basis of attorney-client privilege solely because of Wright’s participation in those 
communications.  Madelaine shall disclose any communications in this category to Great 
Northern no later than February 21, 2020.                                 
                   SUBPOENAS TO NON-PARTIES                              

    Great Northern’s second motion seeks leave to serve two non-parties with document 
subpoenas and to do so after the current discovery deadline of January 31, 2020.  Def. Ltr. dated 
Jan. 27, 2020, Dkt. 98.  According to Great Northern, Madelaine was attempting to obtain 
financing for its business operations from these non-parties before its building was damaged by 
Superstorm Sandy.  Id. at 2.                                              
    I conducted a telephone conference to discuss Great Northern’s motion on February 3, 
2020.  Conference Transcript (“Conf. Tr.”), Dkt. 104.  During that conference, counsel for Great 
Northern argued that information sought by the subpoenas is relevant because Madelaine is 
seeking to recover damages for business interruption.  Conf. Tr. at 5:21–6:19.  Madelaine did not 
contend during the telephone conference or in its opposition letter that the information Great 

Northern seeks by way of these subpoenas is irrelevant or beyond the scope of discovery 
permitted pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(b)(1).  See Pl. Ltr. dated Jan. 31, 2020, Dkt. 100.  
Rather, Madelaine’s primary arguments in opposition to the motion are that it has already 
produced sufficient information about its financial condition and that Great Northern’s 
application is untimely.                                                  
    The information sought is plainly relevant to Madelaine’s claim for damages.  With 
respect to the untimeliness of the subpoenas, Great Northern contends that it was expecting 
Madelaine to provide more complete information about its applications for financing.  Great 
Northern further contends that it learned about these applications only after other non-parties 

produced documents in response to subpoenas it served previously.  Although Madelaine 
contests Great Northern’s version of events in certain respects, it is clear that any delay by Great 
Northern will not meaningfully prejudice Madelaine because there is no imminent trial date.  See 
Order of United States District Judge Dearie entered on February 6, 2020.  Because the 
information sought by the subpoenas Great Northern seeks to serve is likely to be relevant, and 
because Madelaine will not be prejudiced if the subpoenas are served, Great Northern’s motion 
is granted. 
                                CONCLUSION 
      For the reasons stated above, Great Northern’s motion to compel disclosure of 
communications withheld on the ground that Madelaine reasonably believed Scott Wright to be a 
licensed attorney is granted, and Great Northern’s motion for leave to serve document subpoenas 
on two non-parties is granted as well. 
                                    SO ORDERED. 

                                    StevenM.Gold 
                                    United States Magistrate Judge 
Brooklyn, New York 
February 7, 2020 
U:\#Clerk Files\Decisions 2020\Madelaine v. Chocolate Novelties 15-CV-5830.docm