UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                              
             DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                               

            CIVIL ACTION NO. 22-12119-RGS                            

                 ALEXANDRA MELINO                                    

                          v.                                         

              BOSTON MEDICAL CENTER                                  

            MEMORANDUM AND ORDER ON                                  
   DEFENDANT’S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT                           

                     May 28, 2024                                    

STEARNS, D.J.                                                             
Alexandra Melino brings this religious discrimination action against 
her former employer, Boston Medical Center (BMC).  She asserts that BMC   
violated  Title  VII  of  the  Civil  Rights  Act  of  1964  (Title  VII),  42  U.S.C. 
§§ 2000e-2(a),  and  the  Massachusetts  anti-discrimination  law  (Chapter 
151B), Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 151B, when it terminated her in the fall of 2021 
for failing to comply with its COVID-19 vaccination requirement.  Defendant 
now moves for summary judgment.  For the following reasons, the court will 
allow the motion.                                                         
                     DISCUSSION                                      
Summary judgment is appropriate when, based upon the pleadings,      
affidavits, and depositions, “there is no genuine dispute as to any material 
fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.”  Fed. R. Civ. 
P. 56(a).  “To succeed, the moving party must show that there is an absence 

of evidence to support the nonmoving party’s position.”  Rogers v. Fair, 902 
F.2d 140, 143 (1st Cir. 1990).  “‘[T]he mere existence of a scintilla of evidence’ 
is  insufficient  to  defeat  a  properly  supported  motion  for  summary 
judgment.”  Torres v. E.I. Dupont De Nemours & Co., 219 F.3d 13, 18 (1st  

Cir. 2000), quoting Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 252    
(1986).                                                                   
Courts  assess  religious  discrimination  claims1  using  a  two-part 

framework:                                                                
First, a plaintiff must make his prima facie case that a bona fide   
religious practice conflicts with an employment requirement and      
was the reason for the adverse employment action.  The burden        
then shifts to the employer to show that it offered a reasonable     
accommodation or, if it did not offer an accommodation, that         
doing so would have resulted in undue hardship.                      

Lowe v. Mills, 68 F.4th 706, 719 (1st Cir. 2023) (cleaned up).  Here, the court 
need not decide whether Melino has made her prima facie case because, even 
assuming she has, her claim fails at the undue hardship stage.            

1 The court analyzes the Title VII and Chapter 151B claims together, as 
“Chapter 151B uses a similar framework [to that of Title VII] to evaluate 
failure to accommodate claims.”  See Mekonnen v. OTG Mgmt., LLC, 394 F.   
Supp. 3d 134, 157 (D. Mass. 2019).                                        
As the Supreme Court recently clarified in Groff v. DeJoy, 600 U.S. 447 
(2023), an accommodation poses undue hardship “when [the] burden is       

substantial in the overall context of an employer’s business.”  Id. at 468.  In 
determining whether a burden is substantial, a court must consider “all   
relevant factors in the case at hand, including the particular accommodations 
at issue, and their practical impact in light of the nature, size and operating 

cost  of  [an]  employer.”    Id.  at  470-471  (internal  quotation  marks  and 
citations omitted) (alteration in original).                              
Defendant proffers evidence that (1) Melino could not work remotely  

because her job responsibilities included providing direct care to patients; 
(2)  Melino  could  not  work  in-person  while  she  remained  unvaccinated 
without risking the health and safety of her patients (vulnerable individuals 
in  critical  condition  who  often  relied  on  respirators)  and  other  medical 

professionals;2 and (3) any feasible accommodation would have imposed     
“substantial increased costs” on BMC.  Id. at 470.                        


2 The court denies the motion to strike for failure to comply with the 
conference requirement of L.R. 7.1.  The court notes, however, that even if 
the court were to strike the relevant paragraphs of the Hickey Declaration, 
BMC need not rely on this testimony to establish the recommendations of   
the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (CDC).    These     
recommendations, and the medical and statistical information upon which   
they rest, are subject to judicial notice.  See Fed. R. Evid. 201(b)(2); Gent v. 
CUNA Mut. Ins. Soc’y, 611 F.3d 79, 84 n.5 (1st Cir. 2010) (taking judicial 
notice of factual information on CDC’s website).                          
Melino  does  not  dispute  that,  if  the  vaccine  provides  protections 
against COVID-19 infection and unvaccinated individuals are consequently  

at higher risk of transmitting the disease, this evidence suffices to show that 
accommodating  her  request  would  “substantial[ly]”  burden  the  agency’s 
operations.3  Id. at 468; see Pl.’s Opp’n to Mot. for Summ. J. (Pl.’s Opp’n) 
[Dkt  #  23]  at  10  (“If  the  vaccines  worked,  it  would  not  be  difficult  for 

Defendant  to  establish  undue  hardship.”).    She  challenges  only  the 
underlying  assumption  that  the  vaccine  protects  against  infection.    The 
problem is this: the record is devoid of any evidence from which a reasonable 

juror could give credence to her medical hypothesis.                      
Melino points to a statement by a spokesperson of the U.S. Food and  
Drug  Administration  (FDA)  that  the  vaccine  does  not  protect  against 
infection with the SARS-CoV-2 virus.4  But even assuming this statement is 


3 This is wise.  Courts across the country have found similar evidence 
sufficient to establish undue hardship.  See, e.g., Conner v. Raver, 2023 WL 
5498728, at *6 (N.D. Cal. Aug. 24, 2023); Beickert v. N.Y.C. Dep’t of Educ., 
2023 WL 6214236, at *5-6 (E.D.N.Y. Sept. 25, 2023).                       

4 It is not clear whether Melino also intends to rely on the two articles 
cited cursorily in footnotes 2 and 3, as her in-text argument focuses on the 
alleged inconsistency between BMC’s position in its motion and its position 
in  its  pleading  and  discovery  responses  (an  inconsistency  that,  even  if 
existent, does nothing to either prove or disprove the effectiveness of the 
vaccine).  To the extent she does, however, the court finds her argument  
unavailing.  Not only are the articles inadmissible as hearsay, but they also 
are not within the record before the court.  The link provided for the first 
admissible non-hearsay, the quote is taken out of context.  When the relevant 
paragraph is read as a whole, it becomes clear that the FDA official was  

merely clarifying that the vaccine is designed to prevent infection with the 
disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus and not infection by the virus itself.  
See Ex. B to Vickery Aff. [Dkt # 23-5] at 12.  So understood, the statement 
affirms rather than casts doubt upon the efficacy of the vaccine in protecting 

against COVID-19.                                                         
                       ORDER                                         
For  the  foregoing  reasons,  the  motion  for  summary  judgment  is 

ALLOWED.  The Clerk shall enter judgment against Melino and close the     
case.                                                                     

                         SO ORDERED.                                 

                         /s/ Richard G. Stearns                      
                         UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE                





article (upon which the second article relies for the quoted absolute risk 
reduction  rate)  turns  up  an  error  page,  and  Melino  has  not  otherwise 
attached a copy of the article for the court’s review.