UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                           
                   DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                             

KAREN MORALES POSADA, AMANDA   *                                         
SARMENTO FERREIRA GUIMARAES,   *                                         
WILLIANA ROCHA,                *                                         
                               *                                         
     Plaintiffs,               *                                         
                               *                                         
          v.                   *    Civil Action No. 1:20-cv-11862-IT    
                               *                                         
CULTURAL CARE, INC.,           *                                         
                               *                                         
     Defendant.                *                                         

                     MEMORANDUM & ORDER                                  

                         February 28, 2024                               
TALWANI, D.J.                                                             
    Plaintiffs Karen Morales Posada, Amanda Sarmento Ferreira Guimaraes, Williana Rocha, 
and Sara Barrientos assert against Cultural Care, Inc. (“Cultural Care Inc.”), an au pair agency: 
claims on their own behalf and on behalf of similarly situated au pairs who have opted in to this 
litigation for violations of the federal Fair Labor Standards Act; and claims on their own behalf 
and on behalf of putative classes and subclasses for violations of various state laws. Cultural 
Care Inc. has now moved to compel the named Plaintiffs and all opt-in Plaintiffs to arbitration 
and for other or alternative relief, based on two agreements. Motion to Compel Arbitration [Doc. 
No. 309].                                                                 
    For the reasons set forth herein, to the extent arbitration is sought based on a 2023 
agreement between individual au pairs and Cultural Care Inc., the motion is DENIED without 
prejudice where Cultural Care Inc. has not identified any named or opt-in Plaintiffs who signed 
the 2023 agreement. To the extent arbitration is sought based on a contract signed by the 
Plaintiffs and another party, International Care, Ltd., the motion is DENIED where Cultural Care 
Inc. has waived any right to enforce that arbitration provision, and in any event may not enforce 
it either as a third-party beneficiary or under the doctrine of equitable estoppel. 
 I.   Background                                                         
    A.  The Original and Amended Complaints and the First Motion to Dismiss 

    On October 15, 2020, Karen Morales Posada filed the original Complaint [Doc. No. 1] in 
this action. On December 24, 2020, Cultural Care Inc. filed its first Motion to Dismiss [Doc. No. 
11]. Shortly thereafter, on January 14, 2021, Morales Posada, joined by Amanda Sarmento 
Ferreira Guimaraes and Williana Rocha, filed an Amended Complaint [Doc. No. 23], and the 
court denied the first Motion to Dismiss as moot [Doc. No. 25].           
    B.  Temporary Stay of Discovery and the Commencement of Opt-In Filings 
    The parties subsequently filed a join motion seeking, inter alia, a deadline for Plaintiffs to 
file a second amended complaint and a temporary stay of discovery, Joint Motion [Doc. No. 29], 
which the court allowed, Elec. Order [Doc. No. 30]. Beginning February 3, 2021, Plaintiffs 
began filing opt-in Plaintiffs’ Notices of Consent to Sue. See, e.g., Notices of Consent to Sue 

[Doc. Nos. 32-42].                                                        
    C.  The Second Amended Complaint                                     
    On February 19, 2021, Morales Posada, Ferreira Guimaraes, Rocha, and Sara Barrientos 
filed the operative Second Amended Complaint [Doc. No. 43] alleging that Cultural Care Inc. is 
a U.S.-based au pair agency that sponsors foreign citizens’ entry to this country, thereby 
allowing them to acquire the J-1 visas they need in order to work as au pairs in the United States. 
Id. ¶ 13. Plaintiffs alleged that they are citizens of other countries who provided in-home 
childcare services in the United States as au pairs employed by Cultural Care Inc. Id. ¶¶ 31-83. 
They alleged further that once they and other au pairs entered the United States, Cultural Care 
Inc. controlled their placements with host families, the communications with host families 
regarding au pairs’ compensation, id. ¶¶ 16-23, and communications with the au pairs regarding 
their maximum work hours and job duties, among other things, id. ¶¶ 24-26. 
    Plaintiffs brought claims under California, New York, New Jersey, Illinois, and 

Washington’s wage and hour, unfair business practices and/or deceptive trade practices laws, and 
under the federal Fair Labor Standards Act (“FLSA”). They sought to recover unpaid wages 
(including minimum wages and overtime wages), liquidated damages, statutory penalties, and 
attorneys’ fees and costs on behalf of themselves and other au pairs employed by Cultural Care 
Inc. Id. ¶ 4, Prayer for Relief.                                          
    D.  Cultural Care Inc.’s Second Motion to Dismiss                    
    Cultural Care Inc. filed a second Motion to Dismiss [Doc. No. 66] on March 22, 2021. 
Cultural Care Inc. argued that it was entitled to derivative sovereign immunity (asserted via 
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1)) as to all claims. It argued further that the wage and 
employment laws allegedly violated are preempted by federal regulations (asserted via Rule 

12(b)(6)), and that Plaintiffs failed to allege facts establishing either that Cultural Care Inc. 
“employs” au pairs or that Cultural Care Inc. engaged in any deceptive practices (both also 
asserted via Rule 12(b)(6)). Def’s Mem. 2-3 [Doc. No. 67]. Plaintiffs opposed the motion. Pls. 
Opp. to MTD [Doc. No. 78].                                                
    E.  Motion for and Opposition to Conditional Class Certification     
    While the motion to dismiss was pending, Plaintiffs filed a Motion to Conditionally 
Certify the Class [Doc. No. 98]. Cultural Care Inc. filed an Opposition [Doc. No. 112] on June 9, 
2021. Cultural Care Inc. disputed the factual basis for Plaintiffs’ claims, including whether 
Cultural Care Inc. maintains a policy of failing to pay overtime or failing to properly instruct 
host families on stipend amounts. Memorandum 9-14 [Doc. No. 112]. Cultural Care Inc. also 
objected to Plaintiffs’ proposed notice to class and argued that if notice was given, it should be 
amended to say that individuals who opt-in “may be required to submit documents and testify 
under oath at a deposition, hearing, or trial, which will take place in Boston, Massachusetts.” Id. 

at 18-19.                                                                 
    F.  Motion to Strike Pre-Certification Consents to Sue               
    Also on June 9, 2021, Cultural Care Inc. filed a Motion to Strike the Pre-Certification 
Consents to Sue [Doc. No. 114], based in part on Plaintiffs’ purported failure to inform potential 
opt-in class members of their need to “produce documents, testify at a deposition, and even 
travel to the United States for testimony at trial” during the litigation. Memorandum 8 [Doc. No. 
115]. Plaintiffs opposed that motion. Pl.’s Oppo. to Motion to Strike [Doc. No. 122]. 
    G.  The Court’s Order on the Second Motion to Dismiss, Cultural Care Inc.’s Notice of 
      Appeal, and the Stay of Proceedings                                
    On August 13, 2021, the court granted Cultural Care Inc.’s Motion to Dismiss as to part 
of Count 14, dismissing Plaintiffs’ claim that Cultural Care Inc. had violated Washington and 
Connecticut consumer protection laws. Mem. 21-22 [Doc. No. 137]. The court otherwise denied 
the motion, allowing Plaintiffs to proceed on Counts 1 through 13 and the remainder of Count 
14.                                                                       
    Cultural Care Inc. sought an interlocutory appeal of the court’s Order “and each and 
every part thereof.” Notice of Appeal [Doc. No. 142]. Cultural Care Inc. also sought a stay in this 

court. Motion to Stay [Doc. No. 156]. Plaintiffs stipulated to the stay after the First Circuit 
denied their request for summary disposition and set merits briefing, and Cultural Care Inc. 
agreed to toll the FLSA statute of limitations for putative collective action class members until 
the First Circuit resolved Defendant’s appeal, Stipulation [Doc. No. 161], and the court entered 
the requested stay, Order Granting Joint Motion for Entry of Stay and Tolling of FLSA Statute of 
Limitations [Doc. No. 162].                                               
    H.  Proceedings at the First Circuit                                 
    At the First Circuit, Cultural Care Inc. argued that the district court had jurisdiction over 
Plaintiffs’ FLSA claims under 28 U.S.C. § 1331 and over Plaintiffs’ state law claims under 28 

U.S.C. § 1367(c); that the First Circuit had jurisdiction to review the denial of Cultural Care 
Inc.’s motion to dismiss state law claims based on derivative sovereign immunity under the 
collateral order doctrine; and that the First Circuit had pendent appellate jurisdiction to review 
the denial of the motion to dismiss state law claims based on preemption and to dismiss the 
FLSA claims for failure to state a claim. Br. for Appellant, No. 1:20-cv-11862-IT, 2022 WL 
159237, at *3-4 (1st Cir. Jan. 10, 2022).                                 
    On April 26, 2023, the First Circuit issued an opinion affirming the court’s denial of 
Cultural Care Inc.’s Yearsley claim of derivative sovereign immunity. Posada v. Cultural Care, 
Inc., 66 F.4th 348 (1st Cir. 2023). The Court noted that Cultural Care Inc. also “challenge[d] the 
order’s rejection of the portions of the motion to dismiss that were based on grounds independent 

of the claim of immunity,” id. at 350, but declined to assert pendent appellate jurisdiction and 
dismissed those portions of the appeal for lack of appellate jurisdiction, id. at 350, 364. 
    I.  The Lifting of the Stay, the Court’s Orders on Pending Motions, and Cultural Care 
      Inc.’s Answer                                                      
    On June 9, 2023, the First Circuit issued its mandate returning the case to this court, 
thereby ending the agreed-upon tolling of the FLSA statute of limitations. Mandate [Doc. No. 
260]; Order Granting Joint Motion for Entry of Stay and Tolling of FLSA Statute of Limitations 
[Doc. No. 162]. On June 20, 2023, this court lifted the stay, Elec. Order [Doc. No. 262] and 
issued its Memorandum and Order [Doc. No. 263] denying Cultural Care Inc.’s Motion to Strike 
Pre-Certification Consents and granting Plaintiffs’ Motion to Certify a Collective Action and 
Issue Notice to the Proposed Collective. The court agreed in part with Cultural Care Inc.’s notice 
to opt-ins, requiring Plaintiffs to amend the proposed notice to state that “[i]ndividuals who 
consent to join this action may be required to submit documents and testify under oath at a 

deposition, hearing, or trial” and to make clear that Cultural Care Inc. disputed Plaintiffs’ claims. 
Id. at 22.                                                                
    On July 7, 2023, Cultural Care Inc. filed its Answer [Doc. No. 274] to Plaintiffs’ Second 
Amended Complaint [Doc. No. 43]. Cultural Care Inc. asserted as one of forty-one Affirmative 
Defenses that Plaintiffs’ “claims and purported class action are barred by their arbitration 
agreements[.]” Answer 32 [Doc. No. 274].                                  
    J.  Motion to Compel Arbitration                                     
    On August 18, 2023, Cultural Care Inc. filed the pending Motion to Compel Arbitration 
[Doc. No. 309]. Cultural Care Inc. seeks to compel arbitration based on two contracts, as 
discussed further below.                                                  

    The parties stipulated to limited discovery regarding the motion to compel arbitration, 
and the court so ordered. Joint Stipulation and Order [Doc. No. 325].     
    Following limited discovery, Plaintiffs have opposed the motion on numerous grounds. 
Pl.’s Oppo. [Doc. No. 368]. They also report that, as of that filing, 7,809 individuals have opted 
into the case to assert FLSA claims. Id. (citing docket).                 
 II.  Standard of Review                                                 
    To succeed on its motion to compel arbitration, the movant “must demonstrate (1) that a 
valid agreement to arbitrate exists, (2) that they are entitled to invoke the arbitration clause, (3) 
that the other party is bound by that clause, and (4) that the claim asserted comes within the 
clause’s scope.” Bossé v. N.Y. Life Ins. Co., 992 F.3d 20, 27 (1st Cir. 2021) (cleaned up).  
    Section Two of the Federal Arbitration Act provides that a “written provision in . . . a 
contract evidencing a transaction involving commerce to settle by arbitration a controversy . . . 

arising out of such contract . . . shall be valid, irrevocable, and enforceable, save upon such 
grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract.” 9 U.S.C. § 2. However, 
the Federal Arbitration Act’s “‘policy favoring arbitration’ does not authorize federal courts to 
invent special, arbitration-preferring procedural rules.” Morgan v. Sundance, Inc., 596 U.S. 411, 
418 (2022). Accordingly, “[i]f an ordinary procedural rule—whether of waiver or forfeiture or 
what-have-you—would counsel against enforcement of an arbitration contract, then so be it. The 
federal policy is about treating arbitration contracts like all others, not about fostering 
arbitration.” Id.                                                         
    As to waiver, the First Circuit has “recognized that the very rationale for arbitration may 
be undercut if a party is permitted to pursue a claim through the courts and then later claim a 

right to arbitration.” In re Citigroup, Inc., 376 F.3d 23, 27 (1st Cir. 2004) (cleaned up). In 
determining whether waiver has occurred, courts employ a non-exclusive, factor-based test. 
These factors include:                                                    
    (1) Whether the parties participated in a lawsuit or took other action inconsistent 
    with arbitration; (2) whether the litigation machinery has been substantially 
    invoked and the parties are well into preparation of a lawsuit by the time an 
    intention to arbitrate is communicated; (3) whether there has been a long delay 
    and trial is near at hand; (4) whether the party seeking to compel arbitration has 
    invoked the jurisdiction of the court by filing a counterclaim; (5) whether 
    discovery not available in arbitration has occurred; and, (6) whether the party 
    asserting waiver has suffered prejudice.                             
FPE Found. v. Cohen, 801 F.3d 25, 29 (1st Cir. 2015) (internal quotation marks and brackets 
omitted). All told, “[t]here is no bright-line rule for a waiver of arbitral rights, and each case is to 
be judged on its particular facts.” Hayes v. Conduent Com. Sols., LLC, No. 21-cv-11545, 2022 
WL 1104622, at *6 (D. Mass. Apr. 13, 2022).                               
 III.  The 2023 Contract                                                 
    Cultural Care Inc. states that beginning in January 2023, au pairs were required to sign an 

agreement with Cultural Care Inc. (the “2023 Contract”). Jordan Decl. ¶ 12 [Doc. No. 310]. The 
2023 Contract states that it is an agreement between “Cultural Care, Inc., located at One 
Education Street, Cambridge, MA 02141 . . . and the individual named below”). Jordan Decl., 
Ex. E at 1[Doc. No. 310-5]. The copy of the 2023 Contract filed with the court has no individual 
named and is unsigned. See id. at 7.                                      
    The 2023 Contract also contains an arbitration provision stating in relevant part: 
    In connection with any claim, dispute, or proceeding arising out of or relating in 
    any manner to this Agreement or my relationship with [Cultural Care Inc.], or any 
    dispute or claim between me and [Cultural Care Inc.] whether in contract, tort, or 
    otherwise, or at law or in equity, whether or not related to this Agreement, the 
    parties hereby mutually agree to submit to mandatory, final, and binding 
    arbitration on an individual basis.                                  
Id. ¶ 27. Natalie Jordan, the Senior Vice President of Cultural Care Inc. averred that “[e]very au 
pair selected to participate in the Program and beginning their placement with a host family in 
the United States in 2023 has signed an identical” 2023 Contract. Jordan Decl. ¶12 [Doc. No. 
310].                                                                     
    On its face, the 2023 Contract does not apply to the named Plaintiffs, who all began their 
employment well before 2023. Plaintiffs note further that Cultural Care Inc. has not submitted 
the 2023 Contract for any of the opt-in Plaintiffs, see Pl.’s Oppo. at 2 n.1 [Doc. No. 368]. In 
response, Cultural Care Inc. asserts only that “[t]hose Contracts expressly delegate all issues of 
arbitrability to the arbitrator, and explicitly provide that [Cultural Care Inc.] can enforce them as 
a party” and that Cultural Care Inc. “cannot have waived its rights to enforce these Contracts 
given that they did not exist before [2023].” Reply at 5 n.8 [Doc. No. 382]. But while Cultural 
Care Inc. concludes that the court therefore should grant the motion to compel “as to any opt-ins 
who began in 2023,” id., Cultural Care Inc. still has not identified any such opt-in Plaintiff who 
has joined the action. Without an identified opt-in Plaintiff, Cultural Care Inc. is seeking an 

advisory opinion only and the court has no jurisdiction to address the matter in this posture. 
Accordingly, the motion to compel is DENIED without prejudice as to the 2023 Contract. 
 IV.  The International Care Contract                                    
    Cultural Care Inc. also asserts that between January 1, 2018, through December 31, 2022, 
all au pairs selected for sponsorship by Cultural Care Inc., including the named Plaintiffs, signed 
a contract (the “International Care Contract”) with International Care, Ltd. (“International Care”) 
setting forth various terms and conditions of their participation in the au pair program. Jordan 
Decl. ¶¶ 6-7 [Doc. No. 310].1 International Care is a Swiss company that is a “separate and 
distinct company from [Cultural Care Inc.].” 2023 Contract ¶ 6 [Doc. No. 310-5]; see Mem. ISO 
Motion at 10 [Doc. No. 312]. International Care “provided [au pairs with] recruiting, screening, 

and other pre-departure services.” 2023 Contract ¶ 6 [Doc. No. 310-5]; Jordan Decl. ¶ 4 [Doc. 
No. 310].                                                                 
    The International Care Agreement begins by defining “Cultural Care” as the “registered 
business name of International Care, Ltd.,” and further specifies that the references to “CC” in 


1 Plaintiffs assert that Cultural Care Inc. has not met its burden to show that the named Plaintiffs 
signed the International Care Contract. Pl.’s Oppo. at 18 [Doc. No. 368]. But Plaintiffs also 
acknowledge that Cultural Care Inc. has provided signed copies of the identical Contract for each 
of the named Plaintiffs, see International Care Contracts [Doc. Nos. 310-1 (Morales Posada 
Contract); 310-2 (Guimaraes Contract); 310-3 (Rocha Contract); 310-4 (Barrientos Contract)]; 
and Plaintiffs have not offered any contrary evidence or evidence that those documents are not 
authentic. Accordingly, for purposes of this motion, the court assumes that the named Plaintiffs 
have signed the International Care Contract.                              
that agreement are references to International Care “and its successors and assignees.” 
International Care Contract [Doc. No. 310-1]. The International Care Contract contains further 
provisions relevant to the pending motion.                                
    First, the arbitration clause of the International Care Contract provides: 

    This Agreement shall take effect as a sealed instrument under and shall be 
    governed by the laws of Switzerland. In the event of any claim, dispute, or 
    proceeding arising out of the relationship of me and [International Care and its 
    successors and assigns], or any claim which in contract, tort, or otherwise at law 
    or in equity arises between the parties, whether or not related to this Agreement, 
    the parties submit and consent to the exclusive jurisdiction and venue of the 
    arbitrational tribunals of Switzerland.                              
Id. ¶ 15.                                                                 
    Second, Paragraph 13 of the Contract states that “[t]his agreement is made between me 
and [International Care and its successors and assigns] . . . . Any disputes will be settled between 
me and [International Care and its successors and assigns] or any legal entity bound to represent 
us and no other third party.” (emphasis added). Id. ¶ 13.                 
    Cultural Care Inc. contends that it has the right to enforce this contract.2 Plaintiffs oppose 
the motion to compel on multiple grounds. The court need only address some of these 
arguments.                                                                

2 Cultural Care Inc. urges the court to adopt the reasoning in Kudlacz v. Cultural Care, Inc., et 
al., No. CGC-20-584567 (Cal. Sup. Ct. Oct. 27, 2023), an unreported California Superior court 
case reprinted as Ex. 2 to Hood Decl. [Doc. No. 369-2], on the issue of whether Cultural Care 
Inc. may enforce the International Care Contract. Reply at 1 [Doc. No. 382]. But Kudlacz is 
distinguishable on critical facts. First, International Care was a defendant in Kudlacz but is not a 
party here. Second, no motion to dismiss was ever filed in Kudlacz, let alone an interlocutory 
appeal of such a motion as has occurred here. And third, Plaintiffs in this case make independent 
legal arguments that were not raised in the Kudlacz litigation: the Kudlacz Plaintiffs “d[id] not 
take issue with whether Cultural Care [Inc.] can compel arbitration even though [International 
Care] is the signatory defendant to the agreements.” Kudlacz, Ex. 2 to Hood Decl. [Doc. No. 
369-2] at 8.                                                              
    A.  Cultural Care Inc. Has Waived Any Right to Arbitrate Pursuant to the International 
      Care Contracts                                                     
    The court finds the procedural history here weighs strongly against allowing Cultural 
Care Inc. to pursue arbitration. As detailed above, supra Section I, Cultural Care Inc. has 
“substantially invoked” the litigation machinery in this case. It fully litigated a Motion to 
Dismiss, claiming not only that it was entitled to derivative sovereign immunity, but also that the 
claims were preempted and that the Second Amended Complaint failed to state a claim.3 In its 
interlocutory appeal, it made no mention of arbitration, instead asserting that the district court 
and First Circuit had jurisdiction to decide the issues presented, and appealed to the First Circuit 
to address not only the immunity question but also Cultural Care Inc.’s 12(b)(6) arguments. 

Cultural Care Inc. also filed an Opposition to Conditional Class Certification, in which it again 
put forth arguments on the merits of Plaintiffs’ claims and objected to Plaintiffs’ proposed notice 
for failing to tell potential opt-ins that they would have to travel to Boston, Massachusetts, for 
the litigation—without once raising the issue of arbitration. And Cultural Care Inc. has also filed 
a Motion to Strike the Consents to Sue, and argued there that putative class members would be 
unprepared to participate in active litigation—not arbitration—including depositions and trial. 
    These actions, taken together, are a far cry from “merely” filing a motion to dismiss, see 
Mem. ISO Motion at 16 [Doc. No. 312] (citing Herrera Gollo v. Seaborne P.R., LLC, No. 15-
1771, 2017 WL 657430, at *4 (D.P.R. Feb. 17, 2017)); cf. Creative Sols. Grp., Inc. v. Pentzer 


3 Cultural Care disputes that its Motion to Dismiss reached the merits of the Plaintiffs’ claims. 
But Sections III and IV of its Memorandum [Doc. No. 67] in support of that motion directly 
addressed whether Plaintiffs sufficiently alleged facts demonstrating Cultural Care was their 
employer, id. at 3-4, 28-29—the issue at the heart of the case—and facts showing Cultural Care 
violated relevant law, id. at 29-30. And while Cultural Care now asserts that its Yearsley defense 
was purely jurisdictional, it argued at the motion-to-dismiss stage that the doctrine’s applicability 
turned on the conduct alleged by the Plaintiffs and “shielded [Cultural Care] from the entirety of 
this suit.” Id. at 2 (emphasis added).                                    
Corp., 252 F.3d 28, 30 (defendant filed motion to compel arbitration two months after filing 
motion to dismiss, before district court had ruled on that motion). Both sides—and two courts—
have expended time and resources addressing arguments brought by Cultural Care Inc. on 
numerous aspects of this case. Cultural Care Inc. has had ample opportunity to raise an 

arbitration defense yet has waited until after it attempted a “full-throated attempt to win this case 
on the merits in federal court” at both the district and appellate levels, see Forby v. One 
Technologies, L.P., 909 F.3d 780, 784 (5th Cir. 2018).                    
    The court therefore finds that Cultural Care Inc. has waived any potential right to 
arbitrate pursuant to the International Care Contract. See In re Citigroup, 376 F.3d at 29 (“Given 
the complexity of the litigation, knowing full well the wide-ranging implications for all parties 
involved . . . , [Defendant] should have acted in a prompt manner to assert its right to arbitrate 
claims in issue.”).                                                       
    B.  Cultural Care Inc. May Not Enforce the International Care Contract 
    Even if Cultural Care Inc. had not waived its right to arbitrate, as a nonsignatory, it may 

not enforce the International Care Contract’s arbitration clause.         
    As a threshold matter, Cultural Care Inc. asserts that the enforceability question may be 
resolved only by an arbitrator and is not properly before the court. That is incorrect. In First 
Options of Chi., Inc. v. Kaplan, the Supreme Court specified that “[c]ourts should not assume 
that the parties agreed to arbitrate arbitrability unless there is ‘clear and unmistakable’ evidence 
that they did so.” 514 U.S. 938, 944 (1995) (cleaned up). Thus, “absent a valid provision 
specifically committing such disputes to an arbitrator,” the issues of “enforceability or 
applicability [of arbitration] to the dispute” are questions for the court to decide. Granite Rock 
Co. v. Int’l Bhd. of Teamsters, 561 U.S. 287, 299 (2010); accord Henry Schein, Inc. v. Archer 
and White Sales, Inc., 139 S.Ct. 524, 527 (2019) (“[T]he question of who decides arbitrability is 
itself a question of contract.”).                                         
    The International Care Contract’s arbitration clause does not contain a “clear and 
unmistakable” intent to delegate threshold questions of arbitrability to the arbitrator rather than 

the court. The arbitration clause covers disputes that “arise[] out of the relationship of [the au 
pair] and [International Care],” and legal or equitable claims that “arise between the parties.” 
International Care Contract ¶ 15 [Doc. No. 310-1]. The arbitration clause makes no mention of 
the arbitrator resolving disputes about whether an entity is itself a party for the purposes of 
enforcement: It necessarily follows that the provision is only triggered once the court determines 
that these parties have agreed to arbitration.                            
    The court therefore considers whether Plaintiffs agreed to resolve disputes with Cultural 
Care Inc. through arbitration. In so doing, the court applies basic principles of state contract law 
to determine the issue of enforceability. See Arthur Andersen LLP v. Carlisle, 556 U.S. 624, 
630-631 (“State law, therefore, is applicable to determine which contracts are binding under [9 

U.S.C.] § 2 and enforceable under [9 U.S.C.] § 3 if that law arose to govern issues concerning 
the validity, revocability, and enforceability of contracts generally.”) (cleaned up); Landry v. 
Transworld Sys., Inc., 485 Mass. 334, 337, 149 N.E.2d 781 (Mass. 2020) (“Our interpretation of 
the arbitration provision in question is guided by decisions interpreting the Federal Arbitration 
Act, and by State contract law pertaining to enforcement of a contract by nonsignatories.”).4 


4 The parties agree that state law governs these threshold inquiries. Plaintiffs assert that if the 
court determines Cultural Care Inc. may enforce the arbitration provision under state law, then 
Swiss choice-of-law must also be applied to the enforceability question. Pl.’s Oppo. at 15-16 
[Doc. No. 368]. Because the court does not find that Cultural Care Inc. may enforce the 
arbitration provision under state law, see infra, it need not reach the disputed issue whether Swiss 
law would permit Cultural Care Inc. to enforce the International Care Contract as a nonsignatory. 
The court notes, however, that the issue has been briefed and preserved by both parties. 
    Cultural Care Inc., a nonsignatory to the International Care Contract, argues that it may 
enforce the contract as a third-party beneficiary or through the doctrine of equitable estoppel. 
The court considers each of these avenues in turn.                        
         1.  Third-Party Beneficiary                                     

    Third-party beneficiary status is “an exception to the general rule that a contract does not 
grant enforceable rights to nonsignatories.” Hogan v. SPAR Grp., Inc., 914 F.3d 34, 39 (1st Cir. 
2019) (internal quotation and citation omitted). “Under Massachusetts law, a nonsignatory 
seeking to enforce an arbitration agreement as a third-party beneficiary must point to ‘clear[] and 
definite[]’ evidence of the parties’ intent that it benefit from the provision.” Landry, 485 Mass. at 
342; see Hogan, 914 F.3d at 39 (when a nonsignatory seeks to enforce an arbitration clause as a 
third-party beneficiary, they must demonstrate with “special clarity that the contracting parties 
intended to confer a benefit on [it]”). “In evaluating whether such ‘special clarity’ exists, a court 
should focus on the ‘specific terms’ of the agreement at issue, being mindful that it ‘ought not to 
distort the clear intention of contracting parties or reach conclusions at odds with the 

unambiguous language of the contract.’” Hogan, 914 F.3d at 39 (citing EEOC v. Waffle House, 
Inc., 534 U.S. 279, 294 (2002)). Critically, “[f]or evidence of intent to include [a nonsignatory] 
as a third-party beneficiary to be considered ‘clear and definite,’ there must, at a minimum, be no 
ambiguity in the arbitration provision as to whether [the nonsignatory] could enforce it.” Landry, 
485 Mass. at 342; see also id. at 343 (direct reference to “agents” and “representatives” in the 
arbitration provision did not give rise to third-party beneficiary enforcement because such an 
interpretation was “by no means the only reasonable interpretation”); accord Steel-Rogers v. 
Glob. Life Scis. Sols. USA, LLC, 624 F. Supp. 3d 10, 17 (D. Mass. 2022) (defendant “not a 
third-party beneficiary because it has not shown a total lack of ambiguity” in the arbitration 
clause).                                                                  
    Here, the arbitration provision does not even make an ambiguous reference that could be 
construed to include Cultural Care Inc. as a third-party beneficiary. By its terms, the 

International Care Contract does not grant third parties the right to arbitrate. The arbitration 
provision references International Care and its “successors and assigns” in one clause, and “the 
parties” in another. There is no express inclusion of affiliates, agents, beneficiaries, or any other 
category that might apply to Cultural Care Inc.                           
    Hogan v. SPAR is also instructive on this issue. In that case, a staffing company engaged 
the plaintiff to provide services for a retail services provider. 914 F.3d at 36. The plaintiff and the 
staffing company entered into a contract (the “Master Agreement”) to which the defendant retail 
services provider was not a signatory. Id. In considering whether the defendant could enforce a 
right to arbitrate as a third-party beneficiary, the First Circuit focused on the Master Agreement 
arbitration clause’s language in isolation, without regard to whether the contract “confer[red] 

upon [the defendant] some benefit unrelated to arbitration.” Id. at 40. The arbitration clause 
“specifically limit[ed] its applicability to ‘the Parties.’ It state[d] that: ‘[a]ny dispute between the 
Parties relating to this Master Agreement or otherwise arising out of their relationship under its 
terms . . . shall be determined by arbitration.” Id. at 38 (emphasis in original). The court held that 
that language “limits [the arbitration clause’s] applicability to the signatories by only covering 
disputes ‘between the Parties,’” which made it “clear that it does not confer arbitration rights to 
[defendant] or any third party.” Id. at 40.                               
    The International Care Contract contains parallel language to the Hogan Master 
Agreement. Here, as there, the arbitration clause is limited to the “relationship of [the au pair] 
and [International Care5]” and disputes that arise “between the parties.” International Care 
Contract ¶ 15 [Doc. No. 310-1]. The court therefore rejects Cultural Care Inc.’s perplexing 
assertion that Hogan is “inapposite” because it covered only disputes “between the Parties,” 
given that the International Care Contract contains nearly identical limiting language. See Reply 

at 6 n.13 [Doc. No. 382]. Further, here, as in Hogan, the court’s determination is reinforced by 
the mention of “affiliates” and the “Cultural Care staff in the United States” in other portions of 
the International Care Contract but not in the arbitration provision: “[G]iven ‘the probable 
sophistication of the drafters of the agreement, . . . the omission of defendants from the 
arbitration clause must be regarded as purposeful.’” See 914 F.3d at 40 (quoting Mowbray v. 
Moseley, Hallgarten, Estabrook & Weeden, Inc., 795 F.2d 1111, 1118 (1st Cir. 1986)). 
    For these reasons, the court rejects Cultural Care Inc.’s claim that it may enforce the 
International Care Contract’s arbitration clause as a third-party beneficiary. 
    2.  Equitable Estoppel                                               
    Under the doctrine of equitable estoppel, a nonsignatory may compel arbitration against a 

signatory where that signatory (1) “must rely on the terms of the written agreement in asserting 
its claims against the nonsignatory”; or (2) “raises allegations of substantially interdependent and 
concerted misconduct by both the nonsignatory and one or more signatories to the contract.” 
Machado v. System4 LLC, 471 Mass. 204, 211, 28 N.E. 3d 401 (Mass. 2015).  
    Cultural Care Inc. argues that the first prong of the equitable estoppel test is met here, 
because “a finder of fact cannot determine Plaintiffs’ status [as employees] without referring to 
the contract[]. . . ” Mem. ISO Motion at 12-13 [Doc. No. 312]. The court disagrees. The actions 


5 The reference to “CC” is indisputably a reference to International Care and its successors and 
assigns, see supra Section IV.                                            
Plaintiffs allege established Cultural Care Inc. as their employer—and that serve as the crux of 
their claims—are not covered by the International Care Contract. The International Care 
Contract covers the au pairs’ general conduct while participating in the program. The 
International Care Contract has no provisions identifying a stipend amount to be paid by Cultural 

Care Inc., setting or limiting overtime pay rates or specific hour requirements, articulating 
Cultural Care Inc.’s fee or cost structures, or specifying the nature of communications between 
Cultural Care Inc. and the au pairs’ eventual host families.              
    The International Care Contract makes only two mentions of wage or hour-related 
concerns. First, it specifies that au pairs must “stay[] within the legal number of working hours 
per day and per week without exception.” International Care Contract ¶ 3 [Doc. No. 310-1]. 
Plaintiffs do not contend they were forced to work outside of any legal hour maximum. Rather, 
they contend they were not paid for hours they legally worked. Second, the International Care 
Contract specifies that “[International Care] is not responsible for any financial disputes . . . with 
my host family.” Id. ¶ 7. But Plaintiffs’ financial dispute is not with their host families or 

International Care—it is with Cultural Care Inc. The thrust of Plaintiffs’ allegations is that 
Cultural Care Inc. systematically misinformed host families regarding proper compensation; 
according to Plaintiffs, the onus is on Cultural Care Inc., not the families or International Care, to 
rectify the wage violations. Complaint ¶¶ 16-24 [Doc. No. 43]. Thus, is entirely possible that 
Plaintiffs’ claims—which are all statutory in nature—could proceed without any reference to the 
International Care Contract. See Hogan, 914 F.3d at 42 (“Hogan’s claims would exist even if the 
Master Agreement were declared void.”); accord Ouadani v. TF Final Mile LLC, 876 F.3d 31, 40 
(1st Cir. 2017) (no equitable estoppel because the plaintiff’s “claims do not depend on the 
existence of a right guaranteed in the Agreement”).                       
    As a result, the court finds that Cultural Care Inc. may not enforce the International Care 
Contract’s arbitration clause pursuant to the doctrine of equitable estoppel.  
 V.   Conclusion                                                         
    For the foregoing reasons, Cultural Care Inc.’s Motion to Compel Arbitration [Doc. No. 

309] is DENIED as to the International Care Contract and DENIED without prejudice as to the 
2023 Contract.6                                                           
    IT IS SO ORDERED                                                     
    February 28, 2024             /s/  Indira Talwani                    
                                  United States District Judge           














6 The court also declines to stay this action as to the California plaintiffs in favor of the Kudlacz 
litigation, see Mem. ISO Motion at 19-20 [Doc. No. 312], where Kudlacz brings California state-
law Private Attorneys General Act (PAGA) claims alone and Plaintiffs in this action bring 
federal Fair Labor Standards Act claims and non-PAGA state claims.

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                           
               FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                         

KAREN MORALES POSADA,         *                                          
AMANDA SARMENTO FERREIRA      *                                          
GUIMARES, WILLIANA ROCHA and  *                                          
SARA BARRIENTOS, individually and  *                                     
on behalf of all others similarly situated,  *                           
                              *                                          
     Plaintiffs,              *                                          
                              *                                          
          v.                  *     Civil Action No. 1:20-cv-11862-IT    
                              *                                          
CULTURAL CARE, INC., a        *                                          
Massachusetts Corporation,    *                                          
                              *                                          
     Defendant.               *                                          

                     MEMORANDUM & ORDER                                  

                           June 20, 2023                                 

TALWANI, D.J.                                                             
    Plaintiffs Karen Morales Posada, Amanda Sarmento Ferreira Guimares, Williana Rocha, 
and Sara Barrientos allege that Defendant Cultural Care, Inc. (“Cultural Care”) has violated the 
Fair Labor Standards Act (“FLSA”), 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq., by failing to pay minimum wages 
and overtime pay and by failing to provide certain disclosures. Sec. Amend. Compl. (“SAC”), 
Counts XII-XIII [Doc. No. 43]. Plaintiffs assert these claims on their own behalf and on behalf 
of similarly situated individuals “who were sponsored by Cultural Care and worked as J-1 visa 
au pairs during any portion of the period commencing three years prior to the filing of this action 
through the entry of final judgment in this action.” Id. at ¶ 120; see also id. at ¶¶ 183, 198.  
    Pending before the court is Cultural Care’s Motion to Strike Pre-Certification Consents 
[Doc. No. 114]. Cultural Care asks the court (1) to strike the consents without prejudice to 
refiling if and when the court conditionally certifies a FLSA collective and approves notice and 
consent forms to join such collective, and (2) to order Plaintiffs’ counsel to cease soliciting opt-
in consent to sue forms and to do so only in accordance with any notice requirements approved 
by the court if a collective is conditionally certified. Id. at 1.        
    Also pending is Plaintiffs’ Motion to Certify a Collective Action Pursuant to 29 U.S.C. 

§ 216(b) and Issue Notice to the Proposed Collective [Doc. No. 98] which asks the court to 
certify a collective action under the Fair Labor Standards Act (“FLSA”), 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq., 
and to approve notice to potential opt-in FLSA plaintiffs. Pls’ Mot. 1-2 [Doc. No. 98].  
    For the following reasons, Cultural Care’s Motion [Doc. No. 114] is DENIED and 
Plaintiffs’ Motion [Doc. No. 98] is GRANTED subject the modifications detailed below. 
    I.   Background                                                      
    Plaintiffs initiated this action on October 15, 2020, and filed their Second Amended 
Complaint [Doc. No. 43] on February 19, 2021. As of June 15, 2023, 1904 individuals, including 
the four named Plaintiffs, have filed (and not withdrawn) consents to join the FLSA collective 
action.1 While the motions at issue here were pending, the court granted in part and denied in 
part Cultural Care’s Motion to Dismiss [Doc. No. 66], Mem. and Order [Doc. No. 137], and 

Cultural Care appealed. Cultural Care also sought a stay of proceedings, Mot. to Stay [Doc. No. 
156], which Plaintiffs joined after Cultural Care agreed to toll the FLSA statute of limitations, Jt. 
Stipulation and Request to Grant Defendant’s Mot. to Stay [Doc. No. 161]. On November 4, 
2021, the court granted the Joint Motion [Doc. No. 161], stayed the action pending resolution of 
Cultural Care’s appeal, and as agreed upon by the parties, tolled the action from November 4, 


1 See Plaintiffs’ Notices of Consent Filings [Doc. Nos. 32-42, 44-50, 53-65, 69, 72-77, 79-82, 84, 
87-97, 101, 103, 105-111, 117-121, 123, 126, 129-130, 134-135, 138-139, 145-148, 150-154, 
160, 163-210, 212-219, 221-240, 242-252, 255-259, 261]; see Plaintiffs’ Notices of Withdrawals 
[Doc. Nos. 136, 140, 220, 241].                                           
2021 (the date of the court’s Order) “until the elapse of two weeks from the date that the First 
Circuit resolves Defendant’s appeal or the stay is lifted, whichever is shorter.” Order [Doc. No. 
162].                                                                     
    The United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit considered and rejected Cultural 

Care’s contention that it was immune from suit (albeit for reasons distinct from this court’s 
reasons). Opinion 4, 26-34 [Doc. No. 253]. The appellate court declined to exercise its discretion 
under the doctrine of pendent appellate jurisdiction to review the remaining portions of Cultural 
Care’s appeal. Id. at 34-38. On June 9, 2023, mandate issued, returning the matter to this court. 
On June 20, 2023, the court lifted the stay. Elec. Order [Doc. No. 262]. Tolling of the statute of 
limitations ends two weeks from the date of mandate, or June 23, 2023.    
    II.  Statutory Scheme                                                
    An action for damages under the FLSA “may be maintained against any employer . . . by 
any one or more employees for and in behalf of himself or themselves and other employees 
similarly situated.” 29 U.S.C. § 216(b). The statute provides, however, that “[n]o employee shall 
be a party plaintiff to any such action unless he gives his consent in writing to become such a 

party and such consent is filed in the court in which such action is brought.” Id. Accordingly, the 
procedures set forth in Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23 for class actions, allowing 
“representative parties” to maintain or defend a suit on behalf of class members whose members 
have not affirmatively opted in, are inapplicable to an FLSA claim. See Genesis Healthcare 
Corp. v. Symczyk, 569 U.S. 66, 74 (2013) (“Rule 23 actions are fundamentally different from 
collective actions under the FLSA”) (citing Hoffman-La Rouche Inc. v. Sperling, 493 U.S. 165, 
177-78 (1989) (Scalia, J., dissenting)). Instead, groups of employees may proceed jointly to bring 
an FLSA claim only as “party plaintiff[s]” who have affirmatively consented to the action. 29 
U.S.C. § 216(b).                                                          
    In Hoffmann-La Roche, the Supreme Court explained the advantages of a collective 
action to plaintiffs and the courts. 493 U.S. at 170. The Court addressed the issue in the context 
of an Age Discrimination in Employment Act (“ADEA”) case, as the FLSA’s collective action 
provision in 29 U.S.C. § 216(b) is directly incorporated in the ADEA. Id. at 169 (citing 29 

U.S.C. § 626(b)). The Court explained that “[a] collective action allows age discrimination 
plaintiffs the advantage of lower individual costs to vindicate rights by the pooling of resources.” 
Id. at 170. This advantage is at least equally important in FLSA actions seeking to vindicate 
minimum wage and overtime laws for low wage employees. See Brooklyn Sav. Bank v. O’Neil, 
324 U.S. 697, 707 n.18 (1945) (“The legislative debates indicate that the prime purpose of the 
[FLSA] was to aid the unprotected, unorganized and lowest paid of the nation’s working 
population; that is, those employees who lacked sufficient bargaining power to secure for 
themselves a minimum subsistence wage.”) (citation to legislative history omitted). 
    The Court also pointed out the benefits that accrue to the judicial system “by efficient 
resolution in one proceeding of common issues of law and fact arising from the same alleged 

discriminatory activity.” Hoffmann-La Roche, 493 U.S. at 170. This benefit is even more 
compelling in FLSA actions challenging relatively straightforward wage and hour policies and 
practices as compared to ADEA cases, which necessarily involve more complex issues of 
discriminatory intent.                                                    
    The Court concluded that the benefits of a collective action “depend on employees 
receiving accurate and timely notice concerning the pendency of the collective action, so that 
they can make informed decisions about whether to participate.” Id. Accordingly, once a 
collective action is filed, the district court “has a managerial responsibility to oversee the joinder 
of additional parties to assure that the task is accomplished in an efficient and proper way.” Id. at 
170-71. A district court may exercise its discretion by conditionally certifying an action and 
sending such notice. Id. at 171-72. “‘[C]onditional certification’ does not produce a class with an 
independent legal status, or join additional parties to the action.” Genesis Healthcare Corp., 569 
U.S. at 75. Instead, “the sole consequence of conditional certification is the sending of court-

approved written notice to employees[.]” Id. (citing Hoffmann–La Roche Inc., 493 U.S. at 171–
72).                                                                      
    Under the statutory scheme, the applicable statutes of limitations continue running until 
individuals affirmatively join the action by filing their written consent. 29 U.S.C. § 256 
(providing that an FLSA collective or class action “shall be considered to be commenced in the 
case of any individual claimant — (a) on the date when the complaint is filed, if he is specifically 
named as a party plaintiff in the complaint and his written consent to become a party plaintiff is 
filed on such date in the court in which the action is brought; or (b) if such written consent was 
not so filed or if his name did not so appear—on the subsequent date on which such written 
consent is filed…”).                                                      

    III.  Cultural Care’s Motion to Strike Consents                      
        A.   Consents Filed Prior to Certification                       
    Cultural Care argues that consents gathered prior to court-approved notice were 
prematurely solicited, that they omitted material information routinely required in court-ordered 
FLSA collective action notices, and that they should be stricken. Def’s Mem. 8 [Doc. No. 115]. 
The statute itself, however, requires no certification or court permission before individuals may 
participate. Nor did the Court in Hoffmann–La Roche mandate that conditional certification 
occur before individuals could join the action by filing a consent.       
    Cultural Care cites two district court decisions from this circuit to support its contention 
that consents gathered prior to court-approved notice should be stricken. Def’s Mem. 6 [Doc. No. 
115] (citing Dyse v. HealthAll Consulting, 433 F.Supp.3d 35, 40 n.2 (D. Mass. 2020) and 
Melendez Cintron v. Hershey Puerto Rico, Inc., 363 F.Supp.2d 10, 17 (D.P.R. 2005)). In Dyse, 
the court found “no violation of the FLSA in obtaining declarations necessary to demonstrate 
that conditional certification is appropriate.” 433 F. Supp. 3d at 40 n.2. Nonetheless, the court 

concluded that the plaintiff “should not have distributed any notice of consent to join prior to 
court authorization” and directed that the consents to join be refiled. Id. The court provided no 
authority or rationale for this conclusion, however, and no acknowledgement of the impact of the 
requirement that consents be refiled. In Melendez Cintron, the court did cite other district court 
cases to support its conclusion that a trial court “must first decide whether the potential class 
should receive notice of the action” before opt-ins may be filed. 363 F.Supp.2d at 17. But the 
cases on which the court relied—Reeves v. Alliant Techsystems, Inc., 77 F.Supp.2d 242 (D.R.I. 
1999) and Kane v. Gage Merchandising Services, Inc., 138 F.Supp.2d 212 (D. Mass. 2001)—
contain no discussion of opt-ins filed prior to court approved notice. Where none of these 
decisions offer any reasoning for such a rule or consider the impact of 29 U.S.C. § 256, which 

contemplates opt-ins being filed both with and after the filing of the complaint and sets the 
commencement date for purposes of the statute of limitations to the date of each party plaintiffs’ 
affirmative opt-in, the court finds no support for the limitation suggested by Cultural Care. 
    Notably, once Plaintiffs sought certification and court-supervised notice, Cultural Care 
asserted that the request was “not ripe” and was “premature” in light of Cultural Care’s then-
pending Motion to Dismiss [Doc. No. 66]. Def’s Opp. to Certification 1-4, 6 n.2 [Doc. No. 112]. 
While this argument supported delay in court approval of notice until that motion was decided, it 
does not justify striking the opt-ins that were filed (or that have been filed while Cultural Care 
pursued an interlocutory appeal). Moreover, since the statutory scheme does not require 
certification for an FLSA action to proceed, Cultural Care’s offer to toll the statute of limitations 
until the court determines whether to certify the class for notice purposes imposes an 
unwarranted condition.                                                    
    The court notes finally that employers may attempt to moot a collective action where 

individual opt-ins have not yet been filed by making offers of judgment to named plaintiffs. 
Genesis Healthcare Corp., 569 U.S. at 78 (“The Court of Appeals concluded that respondent’s 
individual claim became moot following petitioners’ Rule 68 offer of judgment. We have 
assumed, without deciding, that this is correct”). So, unless individual employees promptly file 
consents, their rights to join in such a suit are at risk.                
    In sum, where the statutory scheme requires plaintiffs to file consents to proceed with an 
action, with the statute of limitations running until a consent is filed, the Supreme Court has 
identified the process as one of “joinder” rather than “class certification,” and defendants may 
seek to moot a collective action by making offers of judgment to named plaintiffs, the court finds 
no grounds to make conditional certification in an FLSA action a prerequisite to filing of 

consents to sue.                                                          
        B.   Pre-certification Advertising or Solicitation               
    Cultural Care contends that Plaintiffs’ counsel’s website concerning the case, which 
provides links to allow potential plaintiffs to opt-in, is misleading and that the consents filed to 
date should therefore be stricken. Def’s Mem. 1 [Doc. No. 115]; see also Frisch Decl. [Doc. No. 
116]. Some courts have stricken pre-certification consents after finding that the plaintiffs’ 
attorneys had sent communications that were misleading or false, or that seemed designed to 
trick people into participating in lawsuits for the attorneys’ benefit. See, e.g., Sandoval v. Serco, 
Inc., 2019 WL 2075910, at *6-7 (E.D. Mo. May 10, 2019); Reyes v. Topgolf Int’l, Inc., 2017 
WL 11496868, at *7-9 (N.D. Tex. May 15, 2017); Chemi v. Champion Mortg., 2006 WL 
7353427, at *8-10 (D.N.J. June 19, 2006). In other cases, courts have entered protective orders 
enjoining communication between plaintiffs’ counsel and potential plaintiffs or requiring a 
corrective notice. See, e.g., Laichev v. JBM, Inc., 2008 WL 11452416, at *4–5 (S.D. Ohio Apr. 
11, 2008); Jones v. Casey’s General Stores, 517 F.Supp.2d 1080, 1086 (S.D. Iowa 2007); 

Maddox v. Knowledge Learning Corp., 499 F.Supp.2d. 1338, 1344-45 (N.D. Ga. Aug. 3, 2007). 
Courts may provide such remedies if plaintiffs’ advertising to potential collective action 
plaintiffs is not “balanced, accurate, and factual.” Laichev, 2008 WL 11452416, at *4; see also 
Lusk v. Serve U Brands, Inc., 2018 WL 2979098, at *9 (W.D.N.Y. June 14, 2018); Struck v. 
PNC Bank N.A., 2013 WL 571849, at *5 (S.D. Ohio Feb. 13, 2013); Piper v. RGIS Inventory 
Specialists, Inc., 2007 WL 1690887, at *7 (N.D. Cal. June 11, 2007).      
    These cases reflect the partial protection the First Amendment provides for attorney 
advertising: false, deceptive, misleading or potentially misleading advertising is not protected, 
but limits on truthful attorney advertising must be narrowly tailored to serve a substantial state 
interest. See Shapero v. Kentucky Bar Ass’n, 486 U.S. 466, 472 (1988); In re R.M.J., 455 U.S. 

191, 203 (1982). Moreover, in considering such communications, “there is a difference of 
constitutional dimension between rules prohibiting appeals to the public at large, and rules 
prohibiting direct, personalized communication in a coercive setting.” Tennessee Secondary Sch. 
Athletic Ass’n v. Brentwood Acad., 551 U.S. 291, 296 (2007) (internal citations omitted). A 
website amounts to an appeal to the public, rather than a direct, personalized communication, 
and as such, should not be restricted absent misleading content. See Shapero, 486 U.S. at 472–78 
(overturning blanket proscription on all forms of legal solicitation); Zauderer v. Office of 
Disciplinary Counsel of Supreme Court of Ohio, 471 U.S. 626, 641 (1985) (invalidating 
restriction on truthful, nondeceptive legal advertising directed at people with specific legal 
problem). Consistent with this First Amendment protection, Rule 7.2(a) of the Massachusetts 
Rules of Professional Conduct2 permits a lawyer to “communicate information regarding the 
lawyer’s services through any media.” That permission is limited by Rule 7.3, which prohibits 
solicitation only in certain circumstances not raised here,3 and by Rule 7.1, which prohibits 
misleading communications.4                                               

    Cultural Care asserts that Plaintiffs’ counsel’s website was misleading because “it fails to 
mention anything about the discovery or testimonial obligations of opt-in plaintiffs, or various 
other information typically required by courts when authorizing notice to putative collective opt-
ins for purposes of conditionally certifying an FLSA collective.” Def’s Mem. 2 [Doc. No. 115]. 
Cultural Care complains further that the website “fails to provide a link to Cultural Care’s 
motion to dismiss, contact information for Cultural Care’s counsel, or the fact that Cultural Care 
disputes Plaintiffs’ allegations.” Id. at 3.                              
    The court finds Plaintiffs’ counsel’s website as presented to the court appropriate and not 
misleading, and further, that Cultural Care’s demands would improperly intrude on Plaintiffs’ 

attorneys’ First Amendment rights. As in Lusk, where the court found no issue with plaintiffs’ 


2 The Rules of Professional Conduct applicable to attorneys appearing and practicing before this 
court are (with certain exceptions not relevant here) the Massachusetts Rules of Professional 
Conduct adopted by the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court, as set forth as Rule 3:07 of that 
court, as of January 1, 2015, and subsequent amendments. See L.R. 83.6.1(a). 
3 Rule 7.3 prohibits most in-person, live or real-time solicitations, and prohibits other 
solicitations when the target of the solicitation has made known a desire not to be solicited, the 
solicitation involves coercion, duress or harassment, or the lawyers knows or reasonably should 
know that the physical, mental, or emotional state of the target is such that the target cannot 
exercise reasonable judgment, and the solicitation is for a fee.          
4 Rule 7.1 provides that “[a] lawyer shall not make a false or misleading communication about 
the lawyer or the lawyer’s services. A communication is false or misleading if it contains a 
material misrepresentation of fact or law, or omits a fact necessary to make the statement 
considered as a whole not materially misleading.”                         
counsel’s pre-certification website, “[t]he website maintained by Plaintiffs’ counsel in this case 
makes it clear that the Court has not yet authorized notice, that no liability determination has 
been made, and that there is no money available at this time.” 2018 WL 2979098 at *9. 
Plaintiffs’ counsel’s website may not have included Cultural Care’s position and defenses or its 

counsel’s contact information, but those omissions are not misleading; while a court-approved 
notice would likely include this information, as demonstrated by the cases cited by Cultural Care 
and discussed below, the website does not have the imprimatur of the court and therefore is not 
subject to the same exacting neutrality requirements. See Hoffmann-La Roche, 493 U.S. at 174. 
The website also does not say that potential plaintiffs may be called to provide testimony or 
respond to written discovery. Whether this statement should be included in a court-ordered 
notice is a fair question; the suggestion that attorneys are misleading if they do not list the 
difficulties and burdens of litigation on their website is a novel and unsupported proposition with 
significant First Amendment implications.                                 
    Nor is the description of the case misleading. The upper part of the website reads as 

follows:                                                                  
    On October 15, 2020, an au-pair who worked through Cultural Care, Inc. initiated 
    a lawsuit alleging that Cultural Care is liable, as an employer of au pairs, for failing 
    to pay minimum wages and overtime pay under various state and federal wage and 
    hour  laws,  and  for  failing  to  provide  au  pairs  with  proper  wage  statements 
    containing required information about pay, hours, and deductions. The Complaint 
    also alleges that Cultural Care deceives host families by failing to inform host 
    families that the stipend it tells them to pay au pairs results in violations of state 
    and federal wage and hour laws. The lawsuit is filed as a putative collective action 
    under the federal Fair Labor Standards Act, a wage and hour class action under 
    California, Illinois, New Jersey, and New York state laws, and a deceptive trade 
    practices class action under New York, Illinois, New Jersey, Connecticut, and 
    Washington state laws. The action seeks to recover for au pairs their unpaid wages 
    within  the  applicable  statutes  of  limitation,  an  award  of  liquidated  (double) 
    damages, and other penalties and interest.                           
Frisch Decl. Ex. 1 at 2-3 [Doc. No. 116]. While Cultural Care disputes that it is an employer of 
au pairs, the website’s report that the lawsuit alleges that Cultural Care is “an employer of au 
pairs” is accurate. The website also notes (albeit in a small footer) that “You should consult an 
attorney for advice regarding your individual situation.” Id. at 4.       

    As a final matter, Cultural Care reports that it inspected the code underlying the website 
and noted that Plaintiffs’ counsel appears to be using a Facebook ad tracker on its website. Def’s 
Mem. 3 n.3 [Doc. No. 115]. As Cultural Care concedes, without more this does not establish that 
Plaintiffs’ counsel is actively advertising on Facebook or any other platform. Id. Nor is there any 
basis from this limited report to find that any misleading or otherwise improper solicitation has 
occurred.                                                                 
    IV.  Plaintiffs’ Motion to Certify FLSA Collective Action and Give Notice 
    To facilitate the opt-in process, Plaintiffs seek certification of a collective action and 
court approval to give notice to “All individuals who were sponsored by Cultural Care and 
worked as J-1 visa au pairs during any portion of the period commencing three years prior to the 
filing of this action through the entry of final judgment in this action.” Pl.’s Mot. 1 [Doc. No. 

98]; SAC ¶ 120 [Doc. No. 43].                                             
    In order to determine whether to give such notice to potential opt-ins, “most courts — 
including most district courts in this circuit — follow a two-step approach . . . .” Cunha v. Avis 
Budget Car Rental, LLC, 221 F. Supp. 3d 178, 182 (D. Mass. 2016). The court in Prescott v. 
Prudential Ins. Co., 729 F. Supp. 2d 357 (D. Me. 2010), summarized the approach as follows:  
    The first stage determines whether notice should be given to potential collective 
    action members and usually occurs early in a case, before substantial discovery, 
    based only on the pleadings and any affidavits which have been submitted. At the 
    first stage, the plaintiff has the burden of showing a reasonable basis for her claim 
    that there are other similarly situated employees. In other words, the plaintiff must 
    make a modest factual showing that she and other employees, with similar but not 
    necessarily identical jobs, suffered from a common unlawful policy or plan. The 
    standard at the initial stage has been called “not particularly stringent,” “fairly 
    lenient,” “flexible,” “not heavy,” and “less stringent than that for joinder under Rule 
    20(a) or for separate trials under 42(b). Under this “fairly lenient” standard, the 
    initial stage analysis typically results in conditional certification of a collective 
    action.                                                              

    Later,  when  discovery  is  complete,  an  employer  may  move  to  decertify  the 
    collective action. This is the “second” stage, and the court must then make a factual 
    determination as to whether there are similarly-situated employees who have opted 
    in. Factors relevant to the stage-two determination include: factual and employment 
    settings of the individual plaintiffs, the different defenses to which the plaintiffs 
    may be subject on an individual basis, and the degree of fairness and procedural 
    impact of certifying the action as a collective action. If the court finds then that 
    employees are not “similarly situated,” it will decertify the class and dismiss the 
    opt-in plaintiffs without prejudice.                                 

 729 Supp. 2d at 364-65 (cleaned up).                                    
        A.   Conditional Certification                                   
           1.   Similarly Situated Employees                             
    Plaintiffs allege they were subject to the following common policies by Cultural Care: 
instructing host families to pay au pairs at or near $195.75 per week for up to 45 hours a week of 
work, failing to pay overtime for hours worked in excess of 40 hours a week, and failing to 
compensate au pairs at all for training time, SAC ¶ 121 [Doc. No. 43], and that Cultural Care has 
asserted uniform defenses to Plaintiffs’ FLSA claims, see id. at ¶¶ 13-30; Pls’ Mem. 3 [Doc. No. 
99]. In support of these allegations, Plaintiffs attach forty-nine declarations from opt-in 
Plaintiffs, see Helland Decl. [Doc. No. 100], Ex. 5 [Doc. No. 100-5], who worked as au pairs 
sponsored by Cultural Care from 2019 onward who state they attended a four-day training for 
which they did not receive any pay, that they sometimes worked over forty hours in a week, and 
that they received a weekly stipend without being paid time and a half for hours worked over 
forty hours in a week.                                                    
    Plaintiffs have adequately supported the allegation that Cultural Care has a uniform 
policy of not compensating au pairs for training time where the named Plaintiffs and all of the 
forty-nine additional declarants state that they attended but were not compensated for a training 
conducted by Cultural Care. SAC ¶¶ 29-30 (alleging that the training is uncompensated); ¶ 33 
(Plaintiff Morales Posada), ¶ 53 (Plaintiff Guimaraes), ¶ 62 (Plaintiff Rocha), ¶ 71 (Plaintiff 
Barrientos) [Doc. No. 43]; Helland Decl. Ex. 5 [Doc. No. 100-5] (stating in ¶ 3 of each 

declaration that the declarant attended a training and did not receive pay). Cultural Care does not 
appear to contest Plaintiffs’ allegation that the training is required and uncompensated. Thus, the 
proposed collective is similarly situated with respect to the training policy.  
    Plaintiffs have also adequately supported the allegation that Cultural Care has a uniform 
policy of instructing host families to pay at or near $195.75 per week for forty-five hours of 
work. Plaintiffs point to two parts of Cultural Care’s website to support their allegation: first, that 
Cultural Care’s website states that that the minimum au pair payment recommended for all states 
except Massachusetts “is based on a weekly stipend of at least $195.75 . . . for 51 weeks, 
including 2 weeks of paid vacation,” SAC ¶ 21 [Doc. No. 43], and second, that Cultural Care 
advertises the total cost of the program for host families to be $19,553.25, comprised of 

$9,983.25 in stipend payments to au pairs and $9,750 in fees to Cultural Care, id. at ¶ 17.  
    Cultural Care contends that the website cannot form the basis of a uniform policy where 
the website explicitly states that the $195.75 figure is a minimum payment, not a ceiling.5 Def’s 
Opp. 11-12 [Doc. No. 112]. It also argues, based on cases from outside the First Circuit, that 
compensation may include deductions for room and board, see id. at 12-13, and that host families 



5 Cultural Care also contends that as of June 2021, its website “expressly advises that “host 
families and au pairs may agree to a higher stipend amount.” Def’s Opp. 11 [Doc. No. 112]. 
However, where Cultural Care points to a website publication date both after the initiation of 
Plaintiffs’ case and the pending Motion [Doc. No. 98], the court does not take potentially later-
included notices on the website as instructive.                           
are not required to pay overtime for childcare services, id. at 9-10. However, Cultural Care’s 
arguments in opposition to conditional certification do not, for the most part, dispute that the 
parties are similarly situated. Rather, Cultural Care offers various arguments as to why its 
common actions and policies are lawful. These legal arguments underscore the efficiencies of 

allowing the Plaintiffs to proceed jointly and addressing Cultural Care’s common defenses in a 
single forum.                                                             
    Finally, to the extent that Culture Care contends that conditional certification is 
premature where threshold defenses raised in its motion to dismiss have not been decided, that 
argument is now moot where the court has ruled on the motion. See Mem. & Order 12-13, 18-20 
(holding that Cultural Care is not entitled to derivative sovereign immunity and rejecting 
Cultural Care’s argument that it is not an employer) [Doc. No. 137]; see also USCA Opinion 4, 
18-31 [Doc. No. 253] (concluding that Cultural care is not entitled to immunity). Although 
Cultural Care also contends that other defenses to individual class-member clams vary, its only 
support for that contention is to point to the class members’ burdens of proof. See Def’s Opp. 15 

[Doc. No. 112]. Where Cultural Care continues to assert common defenses as to the legality of 
its actions, the court finds that conditional certification is appropriate.  
           2.   The Beltran Settlement                                   
    Cultural Care also argues that Plaintiffs are not similarly situated because some Plaintiffs’ 
claims are partially barred by a settlement in Beltran v. Interexchange, Inc., No. 1:14-cv-03074-
CMA-KMT, 2017 WL 4418684 (D. Colo. Apr. 28, 2017) (Beltran Dkt. #1187-1) (the “Beltran 
Settlement”); Def’s Opp. 7-9 [Doc. No. 112]. Cultural Care contends specifically that the Beltran 
Settlement precludes the FLSA claims of Plaintiffs Guimaraes, Barrientos, and Morales Posada 
to the extent those claims are based on events before September 1, 2019. Id. at 8-9.  
    Beltran involved claims by individuals who worked as au pairs against a variety of 
sponsors, including Cultural Care. Beltran, 2017 WL 4418684 at *1. The action included both 
Rule 23 state law and federal law claims and FLSA collective action claims. See Beltran, 2016 
WL 695967, at *3 (D. Colo. Feb. 22, 2016), report and recommendation adopted in part, rejected 

in part sub nom. Beltran v. InterExchange, Inc., 176 F. Supp. 3d 1066 (D. Colo. 2016). The court 
certified both Rule 23 classes and a FLSA collective action; the Rule 23 certified classes 
included one class comprised of “[a]ll persons sponsored by [Defendants, including Cultural 
Care] to work as a standard au pair in the United States pursuant to a J-1 VISA.” Beltran v. 
InterExchange, Inc., 2018 WL 1948687, at *14 (D. Colo. Feb. 2, 2018). The FLSA certified 
collective action, as conditionally certified on June 9, 2017, included “all current and former au 
pairs for whom Defendant Cultural Care, Inc., d/b/a Cultural Care Au Pair, was a J-1 Visa 
Sponsor.” Beltran, No. 1:14-cv-03074-CMA-KMT, Dkt. 1176, at 3. The Beltran court did not 
clarify what the end date for the class was, see c.f., Lucas v. JBS Plainwell, Inc., 2012 WL 
12854880, at *2 (W.D. Mich. Mar. 8, 2012) (defining the class end and start date), and was 

settled with an effective date of August 1, 2019, Beltran, No. 1:14-cv-03074-CMA-KMT, Dkt. 
1186, at 11, 27-28 (defining “Effective Date”), Dkt. 1235 (Amended Final Judgment). 
    Defendant claims that the Beltran settlement bars claims that arose prior to the effective 
date of that settlement. But Plaintiffs also assert claims that arise after the Beltran effective date. 
While the Beltran settlement may preclude claims for earlier periods – even for individuals who 
did not opt-in – this legal defense may be efficiently resolved after conditional certification and 
is premature at this time. See Keller-Brittle v. Collecto Inc., 2018 WL 6199568, at *2 (D. Mass. 
Nov. 28, 2018) (discussing what courts consider in determining the scope of a collective action 
class at the second step of the certification process).                   
           3.   The Statute of Limitations                               
    Plaintiffs and Cultural Care do not disagree that any class should be limited to persons 
whose claims fall within the statute of limitations. The parties dispute, however, whether the 
relevant statute of limitations is two or three years. Cultural Care asserts that the two-year statute 

should be used barring a willful violation not demonstrated by Plaintiffs. Def’s Opp. 16-17 [Doc. 
No. 112]. Plaintiffs contend that Cultural Care’s statute of limitations argument is inapposite 
where the statute of limitations is an affirmative defense and not an element of a FLSA claim. 
Pls’ Reply 6 [Doc. No. 133]. Further, Plaintiffs contend that they have adequately pleaded that 
Cultural Care knew or should have known its actions were reckless and/or willful, and that 
Cultural Care may challenge those allegations should it seek decertification. Id. at 6-7.  
    The FLSA “provides that [] actions must be commenced within two years ‘except that a 
cause of action arising out of a willful violation may be commenced within three years after the 
cause of action accrued.’” McLaughlin v. Richland Shoe Co., 486 U.S. 128, 129 (1988) (quoting 
61 Stat. 88, 29 U.S.C. § 255(a)). An employer acts willfully if “the employer either knew or 

showed reckless disregard for the matter of whether its conduct was prohibited by the statute.” 
Id. at 133.                                                               
     At this stage, Plaintiffs have sufficiently alleged that Cultural Care’s actions were 
willful. See Figueroa v. Cactus Mexican Grill LLC, 575 F. Supp. 3d 208, 215 (D. Mass. 2021) 
(holding that allegations that defendants failed to pay overtime and threatened to fire an 
employee were sufficient to survive a motion to dismiss as to willfulness); see also Bah v. Enter. 
Rent-A-Car Co. of Bos., LLC, 560 F. Supp. 3d 366, 373 (D. Mass. 2021) (“However, the issues 
of willfulness and the merits of [plaintiff’s] claims are closely intertwined with the merits of the 
possible class action, and whether the plaintiffs who have opted in are in fact similarly situated to 
the named plaintiff [ ] is a question better addressed at the second stage of the certification 
process, when such opt-in plaintiffs have been identified.”) (internal quotations omitted). This is 
especially true where Cultural Care was on notice after both the Beltran settlement and Capron v. 
Off. of Att’y Gen. of Mass., 944 F.3d 9, 12 (1st Cir. 2019), the latter of which, Plaintiffs contend, 

prompted Cultural Care to update its weekly stipend instructions for Massachusetts host families, 
but failed to do so for other states. See SAC ¶¶ 19-21 [Doc. No. 43]. If, after discovery, there is 
no evidence of willfulness then the class can be narrowed at the second stage. See Enriquez v. 
Cherry Hill Mkt. Corp., 2012 WL 440691, at *3 (E.D.N.Y. Feb. 10, 2012) (taking a similar 
approach).                                                                
           4.   Conclusion                                               
    For the above reasons, the court conditionally certifies a class consisting of “[a]ll 
individuals who were sponsored by Cultural Care and worked as J-1 visa au pairs during any 
portion of the period commencing three years prior to the filing of this action through the entry 
of final judgment in this action.” SAC ¶ 120 [Doc. No. 43].               

        B.   Notice                                                      
           1.   Exclusion for Time-Barred Claims                         
    Cultural Care argues that notice should only be sent to members of the conditional class 
from the date of this order rather than from the filing of the complaint. Def’s Opp. 17 [Doc. No. 
112].6 The statute of limitations in an FLSA action stops running for each individual plaintiff 
with the filing of an opt-in notice (rather than the filing of a complaint). 29 U.S.C. § 256 



6 After making this argument, Cultural Care stipulated and the court ordered that the statute of 
limitations was tolled from November 4, 2021, to two weeks after the appeal was resolved, 
namely, June 23, 2023, which the court calculates as a total of 19 months and 19 days. 
(providing that an FLSA action “shall be considered to be commenced in the case of any 
individual claimant — (a) on the date when the complaint is filed, if he is specifically named as a 
party plaintiff in the complaint and his written consent to become a party plaintiff is filed on such 
date in the court in which the action is brought; or (b) if such written consent was not so filed or 

if his name did not so appear—on the subsequent date on which such written consent is filed[.]”). 
Accordingly, the court agrees that there is no purpose in giving notice beyond three years (plus 
19 months and 19 days to account for the tolling period) from the date of this order for those 
individuals who have not yet filed consents. See e.g., Rosario v. Valentine Ave. Disc. Store, Co., 
828 F.Supp.2d 508, 519 (E.D.N.Y. 2011) (holding that “the notice of pendency shall be directed 
to potential opt-in plaintiffs that worked for [defendant] in the three years preceding the date of 
this Order.”); Whitehorn v. Wolfgang’s Steakhouse, Inc., 767 F.Supp.2d 445, 451 (S.D.N.Y. 
2011) (holding similar).                                                  
           2.  Form of Notice                                            
    Plaintiffs seek to distribute notice by: (1) emailing the notice to each eligible individual’s 

email address, (2) texting a link to the notice to each eligible collective member’s cellular 
telephone, (3) posting a link to a notice to Facebook through targeted advertisements, and (4) 
emailing and texting a reminder notice 45 days before the close of the opt-in period to all eligible 
collective members who have not yet joined the action. Pl’s. Mem. 12 [Doc. No. 99]. Cultural 
Care does not challenge notice through email but argues that Plaintiffs should not be allowed to 
distribute notice via text message or social media. Def’s Opp. 18 [Doc. No. 112].  
    Cultural Care cites Butler v. TFS Oilfield Servs., LLC, 2017 WL 7052879, at *7 (W.D. 
Tex. Sept. 26, 2017) to argue that text messages should only be authorized when texting has been 
used as a means of communication between the plaintiff and the defendant in the past. See id. 
But Butler itself contains no such bar. Instead, the court found none of the methods of notice 
requested, including distribution by mail, email, text message, and worksite posting, was 
unreasonable under the circumstances there where the putative class “is comprised of workers 
who disperse to non-centralized and remote worksites throughout Texas and other states where 

they spend long hours away from their home residences.” 2017 WL 7052879, at *7. Here, the 
potential opt-in plaintiffs are likely dispersed both country- and world-wide. While the court in 
Bhumithanarn v. 22 Noodle Mkt. Corp., 2015 WL 4240985, at *5 (S.D.N.Y. July 13, 2015) 
(cited by the Butler court), referenced an employer’s own preference for text communication 
when it rejected the employer’s various objections to the use text message for FLSA notice, it 
similarly made no suggestion that such a preference was a requirement for such notice. Courts in 
this circuit have permitted text message notifications without any requirement of previous use of 
text messaging in the work context. See e.g., Camp v. Bimbo Bakeries USA, Inc., 2019 WL 
440567, at *5 (D.N.H. Feb. 4, 2019). The court notes further that in 2023, text messaging is 
ubiquitous and generally no longer charged per individual text, and that it is common to reach 

individuals via text rather than by email. Accordingly, the court will allow text notice. 
    The court will also allow the use of social media to reach eligible individuals. Given the 
passage of time since this case was initiated, contact information that Cultural Care had for the 
individuals may be stale. Where the statute of limitations will run until opt-in forms are filed, any 
delay in reaching the individuals will impact their claims. Although there is a risk of generating 
opt-in forms from significant numbers of ineligible individuals, Plaintiffs’ counsel can avoid 
burdening the court and Cultural Care with ineligible individuals by comparing the forms with 
the list of potential class members to be provided by Cultural Care. Nor is the use of social media 
to reach au pairs unprecedented, and indeed, the Beltran court did approve the use of social 
media. 2017 WL 4418684, at *6.                                            
         3.  Notice Content                                              
    Cultural Care argues that the proposed notice [Doc. No. 100-1] should be amended to say 

that individuals who opt-in “may be required to submit documents and testify under oath at a 
deposition, hearing, or trial, which will take place in Boston, Massachusetts.” Def’s Opp. 18-19 
[Doc. No. 112]. There is no clear consensus on whether this type of language should be included. 
Compare Beltran, 2017 WL 4418684, at *5 (approving similar language, including trial 
location); Norsoph v. Riverside Resort & Casino, Inc., 2018 WL 5283427, at *7 (D. Nev. Oct. 
23, 2018) (approving similar language but not trial location); Byard v. Verizon W. Virginia, Inc., 
287 F.R.D. 365, 374 (N.D. W. Va. 2012) (same) with Weeks v. Matrix Absence Mgmt. Inc., 494 
F. Supp. 3d 653, 660 (D. Ariz. 2020) (denying request to add similar language in case with many 
plaintiffs because “individualized discovery was unlikely”); Wynn v. Express, LLC, 2012 WL 
874559, at *6 (N.D. Ill. Mar. 14, 2012) (holding that similar language was unnecessary where 

there were likely to be several thousand plaintiffs and that an individual’s chances to testify or be 
deposed was slim); Walkinshaw v. Saint Elizabeth Reg’l Med. Ctr., 507 F.Supp.3d 1106, 1126 
(D. Neb. 2020) (denying request to add similar language because it “could have a chilling 
effect.”). While it is important to communicate the obligations attendant to participating in a 
lawsuit, including the location risks needlessly intimidating potential plaintiffs. As in Matrix 
Absence and Wynn, there are likely to be many plaintiffs here — 1904 consents had been filed 
as of June 15, 2023 — so the likelihood that any particular individual is deposed or called as a 
trial witness is low. Accordingly, the court finds it sufficient to include in the notice that 
plaintiffs “may be required to submit documents and testify under oath at a deposition, hearing, 
or trial” without further elaboration.                                    
    Cultural Care also requests that the following language be added to the notice: “Cultural 
Care disputes that it ‘employs’ au pairs and argues that, contrary to employment, it supports au 

pairs during their exchange year and oversees host family compliance with Department of State 
minimum stipend requirements.” Def’s Opp. 19 [Doc. No. 112]. Plaintiffs agree to adding the 
first part of this statement but argue that anything after “Cultural Care disputes that it employs au 
pairs” is surplusage. Pls’ Reply 8 [Doc. No. 133]. However, the latter part of the statement is not 
unduly argumentative. Accordingly, the court approves Cultural Care’s addition in the interest of 
judicial neutrality. See Hoffman-LaRoche, 493 U.S. at 174.                
           4.   Opt-in Period and Reminder Notice                        
    Cultural Care argues that Plaintiffs’ requested opt-in period of ninety days and forty-five-
day reminder notice are excessive. Def’s Opp. 19 [Doc. No. 112]. As other courts have 
recognized, notice longer than sixty days can be appropriate where there are extenuating 

circumstances or potential plaintiffs may be difficult to contact. See, e.g., McCloud v. McClinton 
Energy Grp., L.L.C., 2015 WL 737024, at *10 (W.D. Tex. Feb. 20, 2015). The potential opt-in 
plaintiffs here are likely to be young and uniquely unfamiliar with American laws and our court 
system, so erring on the side of a longer notice period is reasonable. Indeed, the Beltran court 
allowed a 120-day opt-in period and a sixty-day reminder notice. 2017 WL 4418684, at *7. 
Accordingly, the court finds that a ninety-day opt-in period and forty-five-day reminder notice is 
reasonable here.                                                          
    V.   Conclusion                                                      
    For the forgoing reasons, Cultural Care’s Motion to Strike Pre-Certification Consents 
[Doc. No. 114] is DENIED and Plaintiffs’ Motion to Certify a Collective Action and to Issue 
Notice to the Proposed Collective [Doc. No. 98] is GRANTED subject to the conditions 
described below.                                                          
    Defendant is ordered to produce, within fourteen days of this order, a list of all au pairs 
that Cultural Care sponsored at any time during the three years (plus 19 months and 19 days) 

preceding this order, including each au pair’s email addresses, cell phone numbers, and dates 
and locations of employment. Plaintiffs’ counsel may distribute notice via email, text message, 
or social media, to all individuals on the list produced by Cultural Care. Consents to join the 
action will be accepted for ninety-days following the distribution of the notice (the ninety-day 
opt-in period) and Plaintiffs may distribute a reminder notice forty-five days into the ninety-day 
period.                                                                   
    Plaintiffs’ proposed form of notice, Helland Decl. Ex. 1 [Doc. No. 100-1], is approved, 
subject to the following modifications:                                   
         1. The following text must be added: “Individuals who consent to join this action 
         may be required to submit documents and testify under oath at a deposition, 

         hearing, or trial.”                                             
         2. The following text must be added: “Cultural Care disputes that it ‘employs’ au 
         pairs and argues that, contrary to employment, it supports au pairs during their 
         exchange year and oversees host family compliance with Department of State 
         minimum stipend requirements.”                                  
    If Plaintiffs’ counsel elects to keep its current website running, it is ordered to make the 
following changes to the website:                                         
    1. The following text must be added: “Individuals who consent to join the FLSA 
    collective action may be required to submit documents and testify under oath at a 
    deposition, hearing, or trial.”                                 
    2. The website must make clear that any individual has the right to hire their own 

    attorney.                                                       
IT IS SO ORDERED.                                                    
June 20, 2023                      /s/ Indira Talwani                
                                  United States District Judge

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                           
                  DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                             

KAREN MORALES POSADA,         *                                           
AMANDA SARMENTO FERREIRA      *                                           
GUIMARAES, WILLIANA ROCHA,    *                                           
and SARA BARRIENTOS,          *                                           
individually and on behalf of all    *                                    
others similarly situated,       *                                        
                            *                                           
   Plaintiffs,              *                                           
                            *                                           
        v.                  *         Civil No. 1:20-cv-11862-IT        
                            *                                           
CULTURAL CARE, INC., a        *                                           
Massachusetts Corporation,      *                                         
                            *                                           
   Defendant.               *                                           

                   MEMORANDUM AND ORDER                                 

                         August 13, 2021                                
TALWANI, D.J.                                                             
   Plaintiffs Karen Morales Posada, Amanda Sarmento Ferreira Guimaraes, Williana Rocha, 
and Sara Barrientos are foreign nationals who participated as au pairs in the federal au pair 
program (under the J-1 Exchange Visitor Visa Program). Sec. Amend. Compl. (“SAC”) ¶¶ 7-10 
[#43]. Defendant Cultural Care, Inc. (“Cultural Care”) sponsored Plaintiffs, coordinated their 
immigration process, and placed them with a host family. Id. at ¶¶ 3-4, 31, 50, 60, 71, 84. 
Plaintiffs allege that Cultural Care, through its failure to adequately pay them and to provide 
certain disclosures, has violated the Fair Labor Standards Act (“FLSA”), 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq., 
and New York, California, New Jersey, and Illinois minimum wage, overtime and wage 
statement laws. Plaintiffs also allege that Cultural Care has engaged in deceptive trade practices. 
   Their complaint includes fourteen separate counts. Counts 1-11 allege, as Rule 23 class 
actions, violations of California, New York, New Jersey, and Illinois minimum wage, overtime, 
and wage statement laws. SAC ¶¶ 123-47 (counts 1-4), 84 (class definition counts 1-3), 148-63 
(counts 5-7), 91 (class definition counts 5-7), 164-71 (counts 8-9), 98 (class definition counts 8-
9), 172-82 (counts 10-11), 105 (class definition counts 10-11). Counts 12-13 allege, as a 
collective action on behalf of the named plaintiffs and any similarly situated individuals in the 

three years prior to filing this suit, violations of the FLSA for failure to pay minimum wages and 
failure to pay overtime. Id. at ¶¶ 183-212 (counts), 120 (collective action class definition). 
Finally, Count 14 alleges, as a Rule 23 class action on behalf of the named plaintiffs and all 
individuals who were sponsored by Cultural Care and worked as au pairs in the states of New 
York, Illinois, New Jersey, Connecticut, and Washington during “any portion of the period 
commencing during the applicable statute of limitations prior to the filing of this action through 
the entry of final judgment in this action,” that Cultural Care engaged in deceptive trade practices 
in violation of the consumer protection laws of aforementioned states. Id. at ¶¶ 213-17 (count), 
112 (class definition).                                                   
   Pending before the court is Cultural Care’s Motion to Dismiss [#66] for lack of subject 
matter jurisdiction and for failure to state a claim.1 Cultural Care argues that it is entitled to 

derivative sovereign immunity (asserted via Rule 12(b)(1) of the Federal Rules of Civil 
Procedure), that the wage and employment laws allegedly violated are preempted by federal 
regulations (asserted via Rule 12(b)(6)), and that Plaintiffs failed to allege facts establishing 
either that Cultural Care “employs” au pairs or that Cultural Care engaged in any deceptive 
practices (both also asserted via Rule 12(b)(6)). Def’s Mem. 2-3 [#67].   




1 Plaintiffs’ Motion to Certify a Collective Action [#98] and Cultural Care’s Motion to Strike 
Pre-Certification Consents [#114] are also pending and will be addressed in a separate order. 
   For the following reasons, the Motion to Dismiss [#66] DENIED as to Counts 1 through 
13 and GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART as to Count 14.                 
I.   Background                                                         
   A.   Overview of Federal Statutes and Regulations                    

   The au pair program is a part of the J-1 Exchange Visitor Program through which foreign 
nationals can come live and study in the United States. 22 C.F.R. § 62 et seq. (general program 
regulations); id. at § 62.31 (au pair program specific regulations). To be eligible to receive a J-1 
visa, a person must be:                                                   
   an alien having a residence in a foreign country which he has no intention of 
   abandoning who is a bona fide student, scholar, trainee, teacher, professor, research 
   assistant, specialist, or leader in a field of specialized knowledge or skill, or other 
   person of similar description, who is coming temporarily to the United States as a 
   participant in a program . . . for the purpose of teaching, instructing or lecturing, 
   studying, observing, conducting research, consulting, demonstrating special skills, 
   or receiving training . . . .                                        

8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(15)(J). The au pair program is open to foreign nationals between the ages of 
18 and 26 and allows such individuals to reside in the United States with an American host 
family for up to two years, where they provide childcare services and complete coursework at a 
local college or university. 22 C.F.R. § 62.31(a), (c)(1), (d), (o).      
   Exchange Visitor Program Sponsors are “legal entit[ies] designated by the Secretary of 
State to conduct an exchange visitor program.” Id. at § 62.2. Organizations must apply to the 
Department of State (the “State Department”) to become sponsors. Id. at § 62.5. If an applicant 
meets “all the statutory and regulatory requirements,” the State Department may grant 
designation via a letter specifying what activities the applicant may undertake. Id. at § 62.6(a), 
(c). Designation can last up to two years, id. at § 62.6(b), 62.7(d), and sponsors can apply for 
redesignation in advance of the expiration. Id. at 62.7. Sponsors are responsible for choosing, in 
accordance with the regulatory eligibility rules, who participates in the au pair program. Id. at 
62.4. Sponsors also have certain financial, insurance, and reporting obligations. Id. at § 62.8-15.  
   Sponsors designated by the Department of State to conduct an au pair exchange program 
have additional responsibilities, including limiting the au pair’s initial participation to one year; 

requiring the au pair to register for and attend educational programs; and maintaining a record of 
monthly (or more frequent) contacts with each au pair and host family. 22 C.F.R. § 62.31(c). 
   The au pair specific regulations also require sponsors to provide the au pair and the host 
family documentation about: the au pair program rules, a participant’s host family and the 
surrounding community, the participant’s educational institution, travel arrangements, and the 
State Department’s “written statement and brochure” about the program. Id. at 62.31(f), (i).2 
Sponsors must also select and screen host families in accordance with State Department criteria. 
Id. at § 62.31(e), (h). And there are specific au pair program monitoring and reporting 
obligations. Id. at 62.31(c)(5)-(9), (l), (m).                            




2 Cultural Care asks the court to take judicial notice of what it claims is a copy of the State 
Department brochure. Courts can take judicial notice of information from an official government 
website that is “not subject to reasonable dispute.” Gent v. CUNA Mut. Ins. Soc'y, 611 F.3d 79, 
84 n.5 (1st Cir. 2010) (citing Denius v. Dunlap, 330 F.3d 919, 926-27 (7th Cir. 2003)) (taking 
judicial notice of information on the CDC website). The brochure, filed as an exhibit to Cultural 
Care's motion, appears on a webpage with a government domain (https://j1.state.gov) and thus 
seems to be from a government website. Def's Mem. 9 [#67]. The webpage only contains the 
brochure, so it is not possible to confirm that the brochure is current. Plaintiffs, however, also 
cite to the brochure in their memorandum opposing the motion to dismiss, Pl.’s Mem. 3 n.1 
[#78], so it appears they do not contest the authenticity of the document. It is therefore 
appropriate for the court to take judicial notice. See Watterson v. Page, 987 F.2d 1, 3 (1st Cir. 
1993) (“Ordinarily . . . consideration of documents not attached to the complaint . . . is forbidden, 
unless the proceeding is properly converted into one for summary judgment . . . . However, 
courts have made narrow exceptions for documents the authenticity of which are not disputed by 
the parties . . . .”) (citation omitted); O'Hara v. Diageo-Guinness, USA, Inc., 306 F. Supp. 3d 
441, 457 (D. Mass. 2018), on reconsideration, 370 F. Supp. 3d 204 (D. Mass. 2019). 
   Of particular relevance here, the regulations address au pair wages and hours in a few 
places. First, au pair sponsors are specifically charged with limiting the number of hours per day 
and per week that the au pair participant is obligated to provide child care services. Id. at 
62.31(c). The sponsor may not place an au pair with a host family unless the family signs a 

written agreement limiting the obligation to provide child care services for the au pair to ten 
hours per day and forty-five hours per week. Id. at 62.31(e)(5). Sponsors also must require that 
au pair participants “[a]re compensated at a weekly rate based upon forty-five hours of child 
care services per week and paid in conformance with the requirements of the Fair Labor 
Standards Act as interpreted and implemented by the United States Department of Labor.” Id. at 
62.31(j)(1). The regulations make the aforementioned hourly limitations binding on  sponsors 
and require that au pairs receive at least one and a half days off each week, one full weekend off 
each month, and two weeks of paid vacation. Id. at § 62.31(j)(2)-(4). In 2009, when the federal 
minimum wage increased to its current rate, see 29 U.S.C. § 206(a)(1)(C), the State Department 
issued a notice indicating that in its view a weekly stipend of $195.75 complies with the federal 

minimum wage rate of $7.25/hour based on crediting room and board as 40% of an au pair’s 
compensation.3                                                            





3 Cultural Care asks the court to take judicial notice of two documents, Wolkoff Decl. Exs. B, C 
[#68], that Cultural Care claims are notices issued in 2007 and 2009 by the State Department in 
which the department calculated the minimum weekly stipend payments owed to au pairs under 
the federal minimum wage. Def's Mem. 12 [#67]. Plaintiffs reference the notices in their 
memorandum opposing the motion to dismiss and do not contest their authenticity. Pl.'s Mem. 26 
[#78]. The court therefore finds it appropriate to take judicial notice of both documents. See 
Watterson, 987 F.2d at 3.                                                 
   B.   Factual Allegations                                             
   As alleged in the Second Amended Complaint [#43] and the incorporated documents, the 
facts are as follows.                                                     
   According to the State Department, each year approximately 3,100 au pairs work in 

California, 2,500 au pairs work in New York, 1,700 au pairs work in New Jersey, and 1,100 au 
pairs work in Illinois, and Cultural Care, a sponsor under the federal program, sponsors the visas 
for at least 10% of these au pairs. Id. at ¶ 13. Au pairs sponsored by Cultural Care typically work 
at least forty hours per week and fifty weeks per year. Id. at ¶ 14. Cultural Care instructs host 
families to pay a weekly stipend of at least $195.75. Id. at ¶¶ 17, 21, 23. Cultural Care advertises 
the annual cost to a host family for an au pair as $19,553.25, comprised of $9,570 in fees to 
Cultural Care and $9,983.25 in payment to au pairs. Id. at ¶ 17. Cultural Care has distinct 
instructions for Massachusetts host families, who are told the following:  
   Paid weekly to your au pair:                                         
   Au pairs who live with a host family in Massachusetts are entitled to a weekly 
   payment directly from their host family, that is at least the greater of either: 

   •  The minimum federal stipend of $195.751                           
   •  The MA minimum wage ($12.75/hour in 2020) times the number of hours the 
     au pair is on duty for the week up to 40. If the au pair works between 41-45 
     hours during a week, you must pay time-and-a-half for the hours worked over 
     the 40 hour limit. You may be able to deduce from the weekly pay to your au 
     pair under the MA minimum wage laws for a meal credit of up to $42 per week 
     and/or a lodging credit of up to $35 per week if you determine all state 
     requirements for these credits are met.                            

Id. at ¶ 20 (content of footnote omitted in the original). Cultural Care does not have unique 
payment instructions for host families in any other state, stating instead that the minimum au 
pair stipend calculation “is based on a weekly stipend of at least $195.751 paid to your au pair 
for 51 weeks, including 2 weeks of paid vacation.” Id. at ¶ 21 (content of footnote omitted in the 
original). Cultural Care provides the Massachusetts  instructions because, “[o]n December 2, 
2019, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit issued its decision that host families must 
comply with Massachusetts labor laws applicable to domestic workers, including the 
Massachusetts Domestic Workers’ Bill of Rights.” Id. at ¶ 19.             

   Cultural Care communicates with au pairs regarding their maximum work hours, the 
performance of their job duties, and other terms and conditions of their employment. Id. at ¶ 24. 
It also retains the right to terminate an au pair’s assignment to a host family (upon a finding, to 
be made exclusively by Cultural Care, that an au pair has been unable to perform his or her 
duties for an extended period of time), to reassign an au pair, to determine that a host family’s 
home is unsuitable, to terminate a host family’s participation in the program, and to mediate 
disputes between au pairs and host families. Id. at ¶ 24.                 
   Cultural Care specifically requires: (1) that if the host family has an infant less than three 
months old in the home, a parent or other responsible adult shall be present at all times, and a 
parent or responsible adult shall stay in the home for the first three days of an au pair’s 

assignment; (2) that the au pair’s schedule be limited to 45 hours per week, with a maximum of 
10 hours per day and no more than 5.5 days per week of work, and failure to comply will result 
in Cultural Care terminating the host family from the program; (3) that the host family notify 
Cultural Care immediately if there is a change in the composition of the family and if there are  
any incidents involving law enforcement; (4) that any adults residing in the host family’s home 
be screened by Cultural Care; (5) that the au pair perform only childcare services and light 
housework relating to childcare services (host families may not ask au pairs to do general 
housekeeping or heavy chores); (6) that the host family provide automobile insurance for au 
pairs who drive; (7) that the au pair contact Cultural Care if the family wishes to take the au pair 
out of the country on vacation; and (8) that the host family notify Cultural Care if the au pair 
needs medical attention. Id. at ¶ 24.                                     
   Cultural Care also retains the right to reject any au pair application for any reason it 
deems advisable and to end an au pair’s placement if the au pair engages in conduct that 

Cultural Care believes is not in the best interest of the program. Id. at ¶¶ 25-26. Cultural Care 
does not provide wage statements to au pairs with information about pay, deductions, and 
withholdings. Id. at ¶ 18. Cultural Care also does not retain records of hours worked, breaks 
taken, or the specific value of room and board provided for Plaintiffs and other au pairs. Id. at 
¶ 27. Cultural Care does keep records of meetings between au pairs and their regional points of 
contact and documents regarding immigration and visa status. Id. at ¶ 28. Cultural Care requires 
all au pairs it places to attend four days of training prior to their placement. Id. at ¶ 29. The 
training is uncompensated, and until recently took place in Tarrytown, New York. Id. at ¶¶ 29, 
30.                                                                       
   Plaintiff Karen Morales Posada (“Morales Posada”) has been an au pair since January 

2019. Id. at ¶ 7. She worked in New York from January 2019 until December 2019, and since 
January 7, 2020, she has been working in San Francisco, California. Id. Morales Posada attended 
three days of training in New York conducted by Cultural Care upon her arrival in the United 
States. Id. at ¶ 33. For roughly her first six months Morales Posada was paid $200 per week for 
every week worked and usually worked about 8.5 hours per day, five days a week (42.5 hours 
per week). Id. at ¶¶ 34-35. In one of those six months she worked two hours on the weekend on 
top of her usual 42.5 hours during the week. Id. at ¶¶ 35-36. For the second six months Morales 
Posada was also paid $200 per work week along with $50 for transportation. Id. at ¶ 39. During 
this period, she usually worked about eleven hours per day on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday 
and 8.5 hours a day on Tuesday and Thursday (fifty hours total). Id. at ¶ 40. From January 2020 
through the start of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020, Morales Posada worked about forty 
hours per week. Id. at ¶ 45. From the start of the pandemic through the filing of the complaint, 
except for June 2020 when Morales Posada worked fewer hours while her host family’s children 

attended camp, on “many days she worked 10 hours straight with no breaks.” Id. at ¶¶ 45-46. She 
did receive “marginally more” payment during this period. Id. at ¶ 45. During this period she 
worked roughly forty-nine hours per week. Id. Cultural Care has not maintained any time records 
for her work, nor has Cultural Care provided any pay statements. Id. at ¶¶ 48-49. 
   Plaintiff Amanda Sarmento Ferreira Guimaraes (“Guimaraes”) has been an au pair since 
September 2018, working in Utah from September 2018 through October 2018, and then in New 
York since October 2018. Id. at ¶ 8. Guimaraes attended “three or four” days of training in New 
York conducted by Cultural Care. Id. at ¶ 53. She has been paid $200 per week for every week 
worked since starting as an au pair. Id. at ¶ 54. From about September 2018 to September 2019, 
Guimaraes worked about nine hours per day, five days a week (forty-five hours). Id. at ¶ 55. 

From about September 2019 to November 2020, she worked about 6.5 hours a day, five days a 
week (32.5 hours). Id. at ¶ 56. From about November 2020 through the filing of the complaint 
here, she worked about nine hours a day, five days a week (forty-five hours). Id. at ¶ 57. She has 
never received any pay statements. Id. at ¶ 59.                           
   Plaintiff Williana Rocha (“Rocha”) has worked as an au pair in New Jersey since January 
2020. Id. at ¶ 9. Rocha participated in three to four days of training in New York conducted by 
Cultural Care. Id. at ¶ 62. She was initially paid $195.75 for every week worked. Id. at ¶ 64. 
After about nine months, the weekly amount was rounded to $200 and from January 1, 2020, 
through filing the complaint she received $250 per week. Id. at ¶ 64. From January 2020 through 
March 2020 (i.e. the onset of the pandemic), she usually worked about seven hours per day, five 
days a week (thirty-five hours). Id. at ¶ 65. From the start of the pandemic through filing the 
complaint here she worked 8.5 hours per day, five days a week (forty-two hours). Id. at ¶ 66. 
Cultural Care has not kept time records regarding Rocha’s work, and she has not received any 

pay statements from Cultural Care. Id. at ¶ 69.                           
   Plaintiff Sara Barrientos (“Barrientos”) has been an au pair in Illinois since August 2018. 
Id. at ¶ 10. Barrientos attended a “several day” training conducted in New York by Cultural 
Care. Id. at ¶ 71. From August 2018 through April 2020, setting aside a two-week period at the 
beginning of the month, she was paid $200 per week for every week worked. Id. at ¶¶ 72, 74. 
She usually worked about ten hours per day, five days a week (fifty hours). Id. at ¶ 75. She 
“occasionally” worked a few hours on the weekend for which she “might” have been paid an 
extra $10 per hour. Id. at ¶ 77. From April 2020 to through June 2020, she was paid $200 for 
every week worked and usually worked six hours per day, five days a week (thirty hours). Id. at 
¶ 80. Cultural Care has not kept time records regarding Barrientos’s work, and she has not 

received any pay statements from Cultural Care. Id. at ¶¶ 82-83.          
   Morales Posada, Rocha, Guimaraes and Barrienots had their J-1 visa—which allows each 
to work as an au pair—sponsored by Cultural Care. Id. at ¶¶ 7-10.         
II.  Standard of Review                                                 
   A.   12(b)(1) Standard                                               
   Rule 12(b)(1) is the “proper vehicle for challenging a court’s subject-matter 
jurisdiction . . . .” Valentin v. Hospital Bella Vista, 254 F.3d 358, 362 (1st Cir. 2001). Federal 
courts are courts of limited jurisdiction, so federal jurisdiction is never presumed. Viqueira v. 
First Bank, 140 F.3d 12, 16 (1st Cir. 1998). The party asserting jurisdiction has the burden of 
demonstrating the existence of federal jurisdiction. Id. A court should treat all well-pleaded facts 
as true and provide the plaintiff the benefit of all reasonable inferences. Fothergill v. United 
States, 566 F.3d 248, 251 (1st Cir. 2009). Dismissal is appropriate only when the facts alleged in 
the complaint, taken as true, do not support a finding of federal subject matter jurisdiction. Id. A 

challenge to the court’s subject matter jurisdiction must be addressed before addressing the 
merits of a case. See Acosta-Ramirez v. Banco Popular de P.R., 712 F.3d 14, 18 (1st Cir. 2013) 
(“Federal courts are obliged to resolve questions pertaining to subject-matter jurisdiction before 
addressing the merits of a case”).                                        
   B.   12(b)(6) Standard                                               
   In evaluating a motion to dismiss, this court assumes “the truth of all well-pleaded facts” 
and draws “all reasonable inferences in the plaintiff’s favor.” Nisselson v. Lernout, 469 F.3d 
143, 150 (1st Cir. 2006). To survive dismissal, a complaint must contain sufficient factual 
material to “state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.” Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 
U.S. 544, 570 (2007). “While a complaint attacked by a Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss does not 

need detailed factual allegations . . . [f]actual allegations must be enough to raise a right to relief 
above the speculative level . . . .” Twombly, 550 U.S. at 555 (citations omitted). “A claim has 
facial plausibility when the pleaded factual content allows the court to draw the reasonable 
inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged.” Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 
662, 663 (2009). In ruling on a motion to dismiss, “a judge can mull over ‘documents 
incorporated by reference in [the complaint], matters of public record, and other matters 
susceptible to judicial notice.’” Lydon v. Local 103, Int’l Brotherhood of Elec. Workers, 770 
F.3d 48, 53 (1st Cir. 2014) (quoting Giragosian v. Ryan, 547 F.3d 59, 65 (1st Cir. 2008)) 
(alteration in original).                                                 
III.  Discussion                                                        
   A.   Derivative Sovereign Immunity                                   
   Cultural Care argues, under Rule 12(b)(1), that the court lacks subject matter jurisdiction 
over all fourteen counts alleged in Plaintiffs’ complaint because Cultural Care is entitled to 

derivative sovereign immunity. Def’s Mem. 18-22 [#67]. Yearsley v. W.A. Ross Const. Co., 309 
U.S. 18 (1940), is the wellhead for derivative sovereign immunity doctrine. The plaintiff in the 
case was a landowner whose property had been damaged by flooding that occurred as a result of 
a private construction contractor’s work, and the Court held that the contractor was protected 
from suit by sovereign immunity because it had been hired by the federal government. Id. at 20-
21. Yearsley and its progeny dictate that to receive this kind of protection a private party must be 
performing exactly as expressly directed by the government. See Campbell-Ewald Co. v. Gomez, 
577 U.S. 153, 166-68 (2016); Cunningham v. Gen. Dynamics Info. Tech., Inc., 888 F.3d 640, 
646-48 (4th Cir. 2018).                                                   
   Unlike the parties that successfully invoked derivative sovereign immunity in Yearsley 

and Cunningham, Cultural Care was not hired by the government to perform certain tasks; it 
voluntarily decided to apply to be a sponsor organization and operate an au pair program, and a 
condition of doing that was complying with the applicable regulations. Cultural Care is thus 
more akin to a company operating in a heavily regulated industry, like a bank, than a contractor 
hired by the government to perform a specific task. Cf. City of Worcester v. HCA Management 
Co., Inc., 753 F.Supp. 31, 37–38 (D. Mass. 1990) (“The Supreme Court has long held that, 
pursuant to sovereign immunity, a private company which contracts with the federal government 
to perform the duties of the government will not be held liable for its actions on behalf of the 
government.” (emphasis added)).                                           
   Cultural Care repeatedly emphasizes that it exists only because of, and subject to, the 
comprehensive commands of the federal government. The regulations, however, make clear that 
sponsors may be entities that have been operating for some time in other lines of business: there 
are regulations specifically addressing the financial information required from established 

entities applying to become sponsors. 22 C.F.R. § 62.5(c)(3)(i). True, the concept of an exchange 
visitor program “sponsor” is a creation of federal regulations, but this is not uncommon. For 
example, the concept of an “authorized dispenser” is created by federal regulations governing 
prescription drug distribution. See 21 C.F.R. § 209.2. And the fact that sponsors must run au pair 
programs in accordance with exhaustive and detailed regulations is much like the situation of a 
federally chartered bank. See 12 C.F.R. § 5.20. Cultural Care’s arguments amount to saying that 
it operates in a heavily regulated area and therefore should have derivative sovereign immunity, 
a principle that is far broader than the court can accept. Accordingly, Cultural Care is not entitled 
to derivative sovereign immunity.4                                        
   B.   Preemption                                                      

   Cultural Care argues, under Rule 12(b)(6), Plaintiffs’ state law class action claims— 
Counts 1-11 and 14—are preempted by federal law and regulations via field preemption and 
conflict preemption. Def’s Mem. 22-28 [#67]. In an earlier action, Cultural Care asked the court 



4 Cultural Care’s claim of derivative sovereign immunity as to the FLSA claims fails for the 
additional reason that the FLSA waives sovereign immunity by permitting suits against public 
agencies. 29 U.S.C. § 216(b) (applying the FLSA’s penalties to provision to any “employer”), 
§ 203(d) (defining “employer” to include public agencies). Cultural Care says that because au 
pairs are not employed by the State Department it cannot be sued under this provision. Def’s 
Reply Mem. 1-2 [#86]. But Cultural Care’s argument for derivative sovereign immunity is 
premised on the idea that it is standing in the shoes of the government by acting as a sponsor 
organization. Def’s Mem. 18. [#67]. It cannot then argue that it is not standing in the shoes of the 
government where the government has waived sovereign immunity.            
to determine that Massachusetts wage and hour laws were preempted and could not be enforced 
against Cultural Care or its host families. Capron v. Off. of Att’y Gen. of Massachusetts, 944 
F.3d 9, 13 (1st Cir. 2019). In that case, Cultural Care did not develop its argument as to sponsors, 
however, and focused instead on host families. Id. at 20 n.5. The First Circuit held that state 

wage regulations are not preempted as applied to host families, id. at 43-44, but left open the 
separate question of whether state wage laws were preempted as applied to sponsor organizations 
as not properly before it and premature. Id. at 20 n.5. Cultural Care’s preemption arguments here 
now seek to have this question addressed.                                 
        1.  Field Preemption                                            
   In cases of field preemption, “the States are precluded from regulating conduct in a field 
that Congress, acting within its proper authority, has determined must be regulated by its 
exclusive governance.” Arizona v. United States, 567 U.S. 387, 399 (2012). “[W]hether the 
regulation of an entire field has been reserved by the Federal Government is, essentially, a 
question of ascertaining the intent underlying the federal scheme.” Hillsborough Cnty. v. 

Automated Med. Lab’ys., Inc., 471 U.S. 707, 714 (1985). Even when no conflict exists between 
state and federal law, “[t]he intent to displace state law altogether can be inferred from a 
framework of regulation ‘so pervasive . . . that Congress left no room for the States to 
supplement it’ or where there is a ‘federal interest . . . so dominant that the federal system will be 
assumed to preclude enforcement of state laws on the same subject.’” Arizona, 567 U.S. at 399 
(quoting Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp., 331 U.S. 218, 230 (1947)). This is determined by 
considering the totality of the circumstances. Bldg. & Constr. Trades Council of Metro. Dist. v. 
Associated Builders & Contractors of Mass./R.I., Inc., 507 U.S. 218, 224 (1993). Federal 
regulations—as opposed to statutes—can have preemptive effect when they are within the 
promulgating agency’s delegated authority. See Fid. Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass’n v. de la Cuesta, 458 
U.S. 141, 153-54 (1982)                                                   
   Cultural Care points out that unlike host families, sponsors have extensive reporting, 
insurance, au pair selection, au pair monitoring, and host family selection obligations. See 22 

C.F.R. § 62.31. But nothing in those regulations suggest an intent to displace state wage and hour 
laws.                                                                     
   The au pair program’s circuitous history supports this conclusion. In 1986 the U.S. 
Information Agency (“USIA”) piloted the program under the Fulbright-Hays Act, Pub. L. No. 
87-256 § 102, 75 Stat. 527 (1961) (codified at 22 U.S.C. § 2452). Capron, 944 F.3d at 15. The 
pilot ended after two years due to the USIA’s misgivings about the statutory legitimacy of the 
program, but Congress then passed “special legislation” to authorize the program on a temporary 
basis. Id. The GAO, at Congress’s behest, then issued a report concluding that the program was 
not authorized by the Fulbright-Hays Act, id. at 15-16, but Congress authorized the program on a 
temporary basis in targeted legislation that did not provide much elaboration. Cultural Care, Inc. 

v. Off. of Att’y Gen. of Massachusetts, No. 16-CV-11777-IT, 2017 WL 3272011, at *4 (D. 
Mass. Aug. 1, 2017). Eventually, in 1997 Congress removed the temporary nature of the 
authorization, but the Act that did so is cursory and simply removes the time limit on the 
authorization. Id. at *5 (citing Act of Oct. 1., 1997, Pub. L. No. 105-48, 111 Stat. 1165 (1997)). 
   This history certainly offers no indication of preemptive intent; it does not suggest 
anything more than a very limited intent that the program continue to operate. And while 
regulations can have preemptive effect, the agency must be acting within its statutory authority if 
promulgating preemptive regulations. See de la Cuesta, 458 U.S. at 154. The court finds nothing 
in the extremely limited statutory history here that would give the current administrator of the au 
pair program, the State Department, the authority to preempt state wage regulation. 
   Even setting that aside, the First Circuit’s comprehensive analysis of the specific au pair 
program regulations reveals no intent by the State Department—or its precursor the USIA—to 

displace state wage regulation in any context, see Capron, 944 F.3d at 29-44, and Cultural Care 
has introduced no new evidence of agency preemptive intent that the First Circuit did not 
consider. Although the au pair program arguably touches on the peculiarly federal arena of 
foreign affairs, the First Circuit has observed that ensuring au pairs are adequately paid probably 
does not jeopardize any significant foreign affairs objectives. Id. at 26. Put another way, the 
federal government has a strong interest in seeing that the au pair program is run according to its 
specifications, but there is nothing to suggest that interest is adverse to requiring sponsors to be 
jointly liable with host families for ensuring au pairs are paid in accordance with state minimum 
wage laws.                                                                
   Cultural Care briefly argues that preemption is particularly appropriate where state law is 

invoked “in an area there has been a history of significant federal presence.” Def’s Mem. 23 
[#67] (quoting United States v.  Locke, 529 U.S. 89, 108 (2000)). The au pair program has only 
been authorized on a permanent basis since 1997. See Cultural Care, 2017 WL 3272011, at *5. 
That is hardly history of a significant presence, and employment is usually regarded a matter of 
“quintessentially local concern.” Capron, 944 F.3d at 24.                 
        2.  Conflict Preemption                                         
   Conflict preemption may occur “where the challenged state law ‘stands as an obstacle to 
the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of Congress.’” Arizona, 
567 U.S. at 399 (quoting Hines v. Davidowitz, 312 U.S. 52, 67 (1941)). In passing on a conflict 
preemption claim, the court may not engage in a “freewheeling judicial inquiry into whether a 
state statute is in tension with federal objectives,” because “such an endeavor ‘would undercut 
the principle that it is Congress rather than the courts that preempts state law.’” Chamber of 
Com. of U.S. v. Whiting, 563 U.S. 582, 607 (2011) (quoting Gade v. Nat’l Solid Wastes Mgm’t 

Ass’n, 505 U.S. 88, 111 (1992) (Kennedy, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment). 
“[A] high threshold must be met if a state law is to be preempted for conflicting with the 
purposes of a federal Act.” Id. (quoting Gade, 505 U.S. at 110).          
   “Conflict preemption is particularly difficult to show when ‘the most that can be said 
about the state law is that the direction in which state law pushes behavior is in general tension 
with broad or abstract goals that may be attributed to . . . federal laws.’” Fitzgerald v. Harris, 549 
F.3d 46, 53 (1st Cir. 2008) (quoting L.H. Tribe American Constitutional Law § 6-26, at 487 (2d 
ed.1988)). Nevertheless, “[a] direct, facial contradiction between state and federal law is not 
necessary to catalyze an ‘actual[ ]conflict’ within the doctrinal parameters of the Supremacy 
Clause . . . .” KKW Enters., Inc. v. Gloria Jean’s Gourmet Coffees Franchising Corp., 184 F.3d 

42, 49 (1st Cir. 1999) (quoting Securities Indus. Assoc. v. Connolly, 883 F.2d 1114, 1118 (1st 
Cir. 1989)).                                                              
   Cultural Care’s conflict preemption argument is premised on there being significant 
federal interests. Def’s Mem. 26-28 [#67]. As noted above, there is no history of a significant 
federal presence, and the First Circuit has rejected the idea that applying state wage laws to au 
pairs impedes the government's foreign affairs interests. Capron, 944 F.3d at 26. The rest of 
Cultural Care’s argument focuses heavily on the idea that complying with fifty different state 
wage laws would be expensive and burdensome for sponsors. Def’s Mem. 27 [#67]. Complying 
with state wage laws would no doubt impose new, and perhaps significant, costs on Cultural 
Care. “But . . . possible increased costs do not stand as an obstacle sufficient to meet the high 
threshold required for conflict preemption.” Cultural Care, 2017 WL 3272011, at *8. And there 
is no inconsistency with the federal regulations that require compliance with the FLSA given that 
the FLSA sets a floor for wages. 29 U.S.C. § 218(a); Capron, 944 F.3d at 34 (noting the 

“expressly floor-setting” nature of the FLSA).                            
   The only actual conflict Cultural Care identifies is that state employment laws generally 
prohibit age and national origin discrimination while the au pair regulations require selection 
based on those characteristics. Def’s Mem. 28 [#67]. But the First Circuit has already rejected 
that exact argument, id. at 25 n.9, and there is no reason to believe that the logic does not apply 
equally in the context of sponsor organizations. Cultural Care’s preemption argument, as to both 
field and conflict preemption, fails.                                     
   C.   Whether Cultural Care “Employs” Au Pairs                        
   Cultural Care next argues, under Rule 12(b)(6), that Plaintiffs did not adequately allege 
that Cultural Care “employs” au pairs because merely following federal regulations—as Cultural 

Care argues is the full extent of its role and the full extent of Plaintiffs’ allegations—does not 
make it an employer. Def’s Mem. 28-29 [#67]. Though there is some support for the idea that 
merely following regulations does not make an organization an employer, the principle is not 
applicable here given the extent of Cultural Care’s alleged activities.   
   A comparison to Cultural Care’s two supporting citations bears this out. The more recent 
case, Ivanov v. Sunset Pools Mgmt. Inc., involved plaintiffs who came to the United States to 
work as lifeguards and subsequently sued both the lifeguard company they worked for and the 
recruiting agency they worked with to arrange their immigration paperwork and initial travel 
arrangements. 567 F. Supp. 2d 189, 190-91 (D.D.C. 2008). The court found the recruiting agency 
was not liable as an employer because it was essentially implementing regulations, but the 
agency exercised much less control than Cultural Care does over the employees. First, the 
agency exercised no discretion in determining where to place to the plaintiffs; it was the 
lifeguard company that “interviewed and hired” the plaintiffs. Id. at 196. Cultural Care, in 

comparison, allegedly retains full discretion of whether to end an au pair’s placement, SAC 
¶ 24(j), whether to end an au pair’s participation in the program entirely, id. at ¶ 26, and whether 
to permit their participation in the first place. Id. at ¶ 25. And the full discretion Cultural Care 
allegedly exercises in these areas goes beyond the explicit requirements of the relevant 
regulations. See 22 C.F.R. § 62.4, 62.10(a). The plaintiffs in Ivanov also paid the recruiting 
agency, 567 F.Supp.2d at 196, but here Cultural Care allegedly receives payment from the host 
family in exchange for the placement—and arguably services—of an au pair. 
   The other citation is from California state court and is cited for the proposition that 
“where the method of performing a task is dictated by . . . regulations imposed by the 
government, the principal is not exercising the manner and means of control as an employer.” 

Sw. Research Inst. v. Unemployment. Ins. Appeals Bd., 81 Cal. App. 4th 705, 709 (2000). But as 
noted above Cultural Care does exercise authority beyond those required by federal regulations. 
In addition to the distinctions noted above, sponsors must ensure that host families are U.S. 
citizens, are fluent in English, have passed background checks, and have enough financial 
resources to be hosts. 22 C.F.R. § 62.31(j). But Plaintiffs allege that Cultural Care retains the 
exclusive right to determine—for reasons not necessarily dictated by these regulatory 
stipulations—that a host family isn’t suitable and to remove the family from the program. SAC 
¶ 24(c) [#43]. Sponsors must have local regional counselors that report “unusual or serious 
situations or incidents involving either the au pair or the host family.” 22 C.F.R. § 62.31(1)(3). 
Yet Cultural Care requires host family to notify Cultural Care if an au pair needs medical 
attention, a category that is not co-extensive with “serious situations or incidents.” And finally, 
Cultural Care retains discretion on what to instruct host families to pay au pairs, though it is 
limited at the lower end by required compliance with the FLSA. 22 C.F.R. § 62.31(j)(1). Cultural 

Care’s policies, as alleged by Plaintiffs, are clearly designed to enforce the government’s 
regulations, but they are also broader than is strictly required by the regulations. 
   The court’s finding is in line with the conclusions of other courts that have examined this 
issue. A California state court has rejected Cultural Care’s challenge to its employer status under 
California wage law. Kudlacz v. Cultural Care, Inc., Case No. CGC-20-584567, Slip. Op. p. 3. 
(Cal. Sup. Ct. Sept. 3, 2020) Helland Decl. Ex. 1 at 12-13 [#78-2]. A magistrate judge from the 
District of Colorado also rejected a challenge to Cultural Care’s status as an employer of au pairs 
at the motion to dismiss stage. Beltran v. Interexchange, Inc, No. 14-CV-03074-CMA-KMT, 
2016 WL 695967, at *10 (D. Colo. Feb. 22, 2016), report and recommendation adopted in part, 
rejected in part, 176 F. Supp. 3d 1066 (D. Colo. 2016). And the Beltran court considered Ivanov 

in detail and arrived at the same answer as this court, emphasizing Cultural Care’s ability to end 
an au pair’s assignment and the defendant’s lack of ability to fire the plaintiffs in Ivanov. Id. at 
9-10. There is no good reason to break from this trend.                   
   D.   Deceptive Practices Claim                                       
   Cultural Care argues, under Rule 12(b)(6), that Count 14, the deceptive practices claims, 
should be dismissed because Plaintiffs failed to include the specific consumer protection laws 
that Cultural Care allegedly violated. Def’s Mem. 29-30 [#67]. But it is not necessary to cite the 
specific provision allegedly violated. Skinner v. Switzer, 562 U.S. 521, 530 (2011); Johnson v. 
City of Shelby, 135 S. Ct. 346, 346 (2014); Saintcome v. Tully, 296 F. Supp. 3d 377, 382 (D. 
Mass. 2017). Cultural Care’s citation to the contrary is once again distinguishable, as the 
plaintiffs in that case, Galvin v. U.S. Bank, N.A., 852 F.3d 146, 160 (1st Cir. 2017), merely 
claimed a violation of a contractual provision prohibiting violating “applicable law”; this is of 
course noticeably less specific than the claims asserted here.            

   Cultural Care also complains that Plaintiffs asserted violations of Washington and 
Connecticut consumer protection law but none of the named plaintiffs worked in those states. 
Plaintiffs do not dispute that they did not work in those states, but argue that it is not necessary to 
have a named plaintiff in each jurisdiction whose laws were allegedly violated, relying on In re 
Asacol Antitrust Litig., 907 F.3d 42, 49-50 (1st Cir. 2018). Asacol does not establish such a 
broad principle. The case was an antitrust class action brought under the antitrust laws of twenty-
five states and the District of Columbia. Id. at 46. The plaintiffs used state antitrust laws because 
they were suing a drug manufacturer but had purchased the relevant drug from intermediaries; 
federal antitrust laws bar such actions, but all twenty-six states had laws allowing such actions. 
Id. The plaintiffs noted that all “twenty-six jurisdictions . . . generally interpret[ed] state law 

restraints on anticompetitive activity consistently with federal courts’ interpretation of federal 
antitrust law.” Id.                                                       
   The First Circuit rejected the defendant’s Article III standing challenge to the inclusion of 
unnamed plaintiffs who made purchases outside the states where the named plaintiffs made 
purchases. Id. at 47-51. This superficially supports Plaintiffs’ argument, but the plaintiffs in 
Asocal argued—and the court agreed—that the state laws were “parallel” to each other. Id. at 49. 
The court rejected the standing challenge because it was convinced the named plaintiffs would 
adequately protect the interests of unnamed plaintiffs, and it was convinced because of the 
parallelism of the state laws. Id. at 49-50. Plaintiffs here made no such allegation of parallelism 
in their complaint, nor did they allege that any au pairs sponsored by Cultural Care were placed 
in Connecticut or Washington. Legal theories need not be fully fleshed out in complaints, see 
Skinner, 562 U.S. at 530, but the allegations here are insufficient to allow the named Plaintiffs to 
bring the claims on their own behalf under Connecticut or Washington consumer protection law 

or to establish standing for unnamed plaintiffs from Connecticut and Washington for claims 
under those state laws.                                                   
IV.  Conclusion                                                         
   For the forgoing reasons: Cultural Care’s Motion to Dismiss [#66] is DENIED as to 
Counts 1 through 13, GRANTED regarding the Connecticut and Washington elements of Count 
14, and DENIED as to the rest of Count 14.                                
   IT IS SO ORDERED.                                                    
   August 13, 2021                    /s/ Indira Talwani                
                                      United States District Judge