UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            

                      DISTRICT OF MAINE                                 


NATIONAL TRUST FOR HISTORIC   )                                           
PRESERVATION IN THE UNITED    )                                           
STATES, FRIENDS OF THE FRANK   )                                          
J. WOOD BRIDGE, HISTORIC      )                                           
BRIDGE FOUNDATION, and        )                                           
WATERFRONT MAINE,             )                                           
BRUNSWICK, LLC,               )                                           
                            )                                           
        Plaintiffs,         )                                           
                            )                                           
   v.                       )         No. 2:23-cv-00080-LEW             
                            )                                           
PETE BUTTIGIEG, SECRETARY,    )                                           
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF            )                                           
TRANSPORTATION,               )                                           
                            )                                           
SHAILEN BHATT,                )                                           
ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL        )                                           
HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION,       )                                           
                            )                                           
TODD JORGENSEN,               )                                           
ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL        )                                           
HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION,       )                                           
MAINE DIVISION, and           )                                           
                            )                                           
BRUCE VAN NOTE,               )                                           
COMMISSIONER, MAINE           )                                           
DEPARTMENT OF                 )                                           
TRANSPORTATION,               )                                           
        Defendants.         )                                           


     ORDER ON MOTIONS FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT ON THE                       
                  ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD                                 
   The Frank J. Wood Bridge (“the Bridge”) has connected Brunswick to Topsham 
since 1932.  But keeping the Bridge in service much longer would require extensive 

rehabilitation.  Starting in 2015, the Maine Department of Transportation (“MDOT”) began 
consulting with the Federal Highway Administration (“FHWA”) to consider the Bridge’s 
future.  Instead of rehabilitating the Bridge, MDOT has decided to build a new bridge and 
demolish the Frank J. Wood Bridge, and FHWA has approved of MDOT’s decision. 
   Those decisions are under review in this case.  The National Trust for Historic 
Preservation in the United States, Friends of the Frank J. Wood Bridge, Historic Bridge 

Foundation, and Waterfront Maine, Brunswick, LLC (“Plaintiffs”) sued Defendants Pete 
Buttigieg, Secretary, U.S. Department of Transportation; Shailen Bhatt, Administrator, 
FHWA; Todd Jorgensen, Administrator, FHWA, Maine Division; and Bruce Van Note, 
Commissioner, MDOT (collectively “Defendants” or “Agencies”), seeking judicial review 
of the Agencies’ decision under the Administrative Procedures Act (“APA”).  Plaintiffs 

argue that the Agencies did not comply with the National Environmental Policy Act of 
1969 (“NEPA”) and section 4(f) of the Department of Transportation Act.   
   The matter is before the Court for final disposition on the parties’ motions for 
summary judgment on the administrative record.  For the following reasons, Plaintiffs’ 
motion for summary judgment is DENIED and Defendants’ cross-motions for summary 

judgment are GRANTED.                                                     
                         BACKGROUND                                     
   The Androscoggin River divides the municipalities of Brunswick and Topsham.  
While the river can be crossed in the east through a bypass route and the west through I-
295, the Frank J. Wood Bridge has served as an important vehicular and pedestrian 
connection because it carries U.S. Route 201 over the river, tying these communities 

together.    This  805-foot  long,  three-span,  steel  through-truss  bridge  is  supported  by 
concrete abutments at each end and two interstitial concrete piers.  The Androscoggin 
Power Company constructed the Bridge in 1932 to carry interurban rail traffic, and it was 
subsequently resurfaced for vehicular traffic.  Today, the Bridge is a contributing resource 
in the Brunswick and Topsham Industrial Historic District, which includes the historic 
Cabot Mill and Pejepscot Paper Company.  The Bridge is also individually eligible for 

listing in the National Register of Historic Places because of its historical and architectural 
significance.                                                             
   While the Bridge is a historical asset, it presents capacity and structural concerns.  
Nearly 19,000 vehicles cross the Bridge each day, posing challenges for bicyclists riding 
amid traffic and pedestrians coming to the bridge from the east side of the roadway who 

must cross the highway to access the solitary pedestrian causeway on the west side.  
Following the collapse of a steel truss bridge in 2007 in Minneapolis, Minnesota, Maine 
Governor John Baldacci directed MDOT to review the safety of Maine’s bridges and take 
actions to mitigate safety concerns.  That same year, MDOT issued a report, titled Keeping 
Our Bridges Safe, that identified forty-four fracture-critical bridges in Maine, including the 

Frank J. Wood Bridge.  See generally AR 2.  These fracture-critical bridges lack redundant 
supporting components, so if a structural member failed, the bridge would likely collapse.  
Because of the historic Bridge’s age and fracture-critical status, more detailed biennial 
inspections are required.                                                 
   In 2015,  MDOT launched the Frank  J. Wood Bridge Improvement Project to 
address the Bridge’s capacity and structural issues and to improve mobility and safety for 

pedestrians  and  bicyclists.    A  2016  inspection  of  the  Bridge  concluded  that  it  was 
structurally deficient and thus unable to support some legal vehicle weights.  Therefore, 
MDOT placed weight limits on vehicles that may cross the Bridge.  The Project assessed 
the  feasibility  of  alternatives  providing  for  rehabilitation  or  replacement.    MDOT 
considered three alternatives in detail.  Alternatives 3 and 4 involved rehabilitating the 
Bridge to extend its service life by 75 years.  The only difference between these two 

rehabilitation alternatives is that Alternative 4 included a new easterly sidewalk.  By 
contrast,  Alternative  2  entailed  constructing  a  new  steel  girder  bridge  on  a  curved 
alignment upstream from the current Bridge.  This new bridge is expected to last for 100 
years and would include sidewalks and five-foot shoulders on each side to accommodate 
pedestrians and bicyclists.  The Frank J. Wood Bridge would be demolished after the 

replacement bridge was constructed.                                       
   In its decision-making process, MDOT estimated the construction and maintenance 
costs of each alternative.  MDOT principally relied upon using service-life costs rather than 
life-cycle costs.  A structure’s service life is defined as the number of years that it can be 
part of the transportation system with maintenance and repair or rehabilitation before its 

eventual replacement.  Service-life costs represent the total cost to maintain a structure over 
its anticipated service life.  Thus, a bridge’s service-life cost includes the costs of initial 
construction, maintenance, inspections, and expected future improvements.  Costs are 
broken down into required annual costs (e.g., inspections and anticipated maintenance) as 
well  as  periodic  items  (e.g.,  bridge  painting,  deck  replacements,  and  structural 
rehabilitation).                                                          

   In contrast to service-life cost analysis, life-cycle cost analysis (“LCCA”), converts 
the estimated costs for each alternative over the defined life-cycle analysis period into 
current dollar equivalents, which is labeled as the present value.  LCCA accounts for the 
estimated construction costs of a project, the discounted present value of anticipated future 
costs, and the estimated remaining value of a structure at the end of the analysis period.  
LCCA also accounts for differences in the design life between alternatives.  Thus, LCCA 

is helpful in identifying the most cost-effective solution and discourages decision-making 
based solely on the initial cost.  For this reason, using LCCA to compare the present value 
costs of alternatives is “[t]he standard criterion for deciding whether a government program 
can be justified on economic principles.”  OMB, Guidelines and Discount Rates for 
Benefit-Cost Analysis of Federal Programs, 1992 WL 12667340, at *3 (Oct. 29, 1992). 

   Although LCCA provides a standard to justify increased upfront expenditures to 
obtain long-term efficiencies, MDOT reasoned that service-life costs provided the more 
accurate comparison of the real costs in evaluating bridge improvement alternatives.  In its 
analysis, MDOT used cost estimates from its 2016 Preliminary  Design Report.  See 
generally AR 7.  Using service-life costs, MDOT concluded that replacing the Bridge 

would cost $17.3 million over the new bridge’s 100-year life whereas rehabilitating the 
historic Bridge using Alternative 3—the cheaper of the two1 rehabilitation alternatives—


1 Alternative 4’s life-cycle costs are $38.2 million over 75 years.  Alternative 4 is more expensive than 
Alternative 3 since Alternative 4 involves constructing an additional sidewalk. 
would cost $35.2 million over 75 years.  Based on this $17.9-million difference and the 
other benefits of a new bridge, MDOT concluded that it would construct a new bridge and 

decommission the Frank J. Wood Bridge.                                    
   Because federal funds would be used in constructing the new bridge, MDOT applied 
to FHWA, a division of the U.S. Department of Transportation, for approval of its plan.  
See 23 U.S.C. § 106.  When federal funds are sought for projects that may implicate historic 
sites, agencies must comply with two federal statutes: NEPA and section 4(f) of the 
Department of Transportation Act.                                         

   NEPA is designed to ensure that agencies have considered information concerning 
the  environmental  consequences  of  their  actions.    Thus,  NEPA  requires  agencies  to 
produce  an  Environmental  Impact  Statement  (“EIS”)  when  a  proposed  action  will 
“significantly affect[ ] the quality of the human environment.”  42 U.S.C. § 4332(2)(C).  If 
an agency believes that an EIS will not be required, it will prepare an environmental 

assessment (“EA”) documenting its conclusions.  If an agency ultimately concludes that an 
EIS is not needed, it will issue a Finding of No Significant Impact explaining its decision.  
40 C.F.R. §§ 1501.4(a), 1508.9(a)(1), 1508.13 (amended and reconfigured by 85 Fed. Reg. 
43,304 43,324 (July 16, 2020)).                                           
   Section 4(f) prohibits the Secretary of Transportation from approving the use of 

protected property, such as “historic site[s] of national, State, or local significance,” in a 
transportation project unless “there is no prudent and feasible alternative to using that land” 
and “the program or project includes all possible planning to minimize harm to the” historic 
site.    49  U.S.C.  § 303(c).    FHWA’s  regulations  under  section  4(f)  provide  that  an 
alternative  is  not  prudent  if  it  “results  in  additional  construction,  maintenance,  or 
operational costs of an extraordinary magnitude.”  23 C.F.R. § 774.17.    

   In February 2018, FHWA released its preliminary EA and section 4(f) evaluation 
analyzing the alternatives.  FHWA adopted MDOT’s cost estimates and agreed with 
MDOT that service-life analysis was the most accurate methodology to compare the 
alternatives’ expected costs.  Having compared these figures, FHWA concluded that the 
rehabilitation  alternatives  were  not  prudent  and  resulted  in  costs  of  extraordinary 
magnitude.                                                                

   Despite receiving comments faulting FHWA for using service-life costs rather than 
life-cycle costs for its analysis, FHWA issued its Environmental Assessment and Final 
Section (4)f Evaluation in February 2019, concluding that the rehabilitation alternatives 
were not prudent since they would result in additional construction, maintenance, or 
operational costs of an extraordinary magnitude.  AR 8 at 1199.  Based on the service-life 

cost differential between $17.3 million over 100 years and $35.2 million over 75 years, 
FHWA reasoned that rehabilitation was imprudent.  Thus, FHWA approved MDOT’s 
decision adopting Alternative 2’s plan to construct a new bridge and to demolish the 
historic Bridge once construction finished.  FHWA made no determination about whether 
these costs, if discounted to present value using LCCA ($13.7 million over 100 years and 

$20.99 million over 75 years), would be imprudent as costs of an extraordinary magnitude.  
In March 2019, FHWA issued a Finding of No Significant Impact, explaining why the 
project did not require a full EIS.  See AR 23.                           
   In September 2019, Plaintiffs Friends of the Frank J. Wood Bridge, National Trust 
for Historic Preservation in the United States, and The Historic Bridge Foundation filed 

suit in this Court, seeking declaratory and injunctive relief to prevent the Agencies from 
executing the chosen replacement alternative.  Historic Bridge Found. v. Chao, No. 2:19-
cv-00-408-LEW.  Plaintiffs argued that FHWA’s administrative decision was arbitrary and 
capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise violative of NEPA and section 4(f).  More 
specifically, Plaintiffs argued that FHWA acted arbitrarily and capriciously by failing to 
compare the discounted life-cycle costs of the alternatives, and they asserted numerous 

line-item  challenges  to  the  cost  estimates.    In  February  2021,  I  rejected  Plaintiffs’ 
arguments and granted summary judgment to the Defendants.  Historic Bridge Found. v. 
Chao, 517 F. Supp. 3d 9 (D. Me. 2021), aff’d in part, vacated in part, remanded sub nom. 
Historic Bridge Found. v. Buttigieg, 22 F.4th 275 (1st Cir. 2022).  Plaintiffs appealed, and 
the First Circuit affirmed all my conclusions except for one in January 2022.  The First 

Circuit held that FHWA’s cost analysis under section 4(f) was arbitrary and capricious.  
See  Historic  Bridge  Found., 22  F.4th at  284–86.    The court observed  that the  U.S. 
Department of Transportation and FHWA’s guidelines indicated  that LCCA was the 
preferred method for cost analysis, and it reasoned that FHWA did not sufficiently explain 
its decision to forego its own guidance favoring LCCA and instead rely on service-life 

costs.  See id. at 285.  Thus, the First Circuit remanded the case “with instructions that the 
matter be returned to the FHWA for the strictly limited purpose of allowing the agency to 
further justify use of  the service-life analysis and/or to decide whether a 53% price 
differential represents a cost of an extraordinary magnitude under 23 C.F.R. § 774.17.”  Id. 
at 286.  In March 2022, I issued an order of remand that quoted the First Circuit’s 
instructions.                                                             

   FHWA published its draft Section 4(f) Limited Scope Re-Evaluation on July 27, 
2022, and opened a 30-day comment period.  See AR 83.  On January 27, 2023, the 
Agencies issued their Section 4(f) Limited Scope Re-Evaluation, Pursuant to 49 USC 303 
Department  of  Transportation  Act  of  1966.    AR  186.    The  Agencies  observed  that 
Alternative 3, preferred by Plaintiffs, “has a 53% higher Life Cycle Cost than Replacement 
Alternative 2.”  Id. at 5877.  The Agencies concluded that the “53% difference in Life 

Cycle Cost represents a cost of extraordinary magnitude.  The expenditure of additional 
funds to construct Alternative 3, which has a shorter life span and leaves a fracture critical 
bridge in place is dismissed as not prudent per 23 CFR 774.17 Part 3 (iv).”  Id.  The 
Agencies reasoned that “there is added risk and uncertainty to keeping a fracture critical 
bridge in service beyond its intended service life, even if it is extensively rehabilitated.”  

Id. at 5875.  According to the Agencies, “[s]pending 53% more money to rehabilitate, 
maintain, and frequently inspect a fracture critical bridge that comes with more stringent 
and costly federal inspection requirements, traffic impacts, and increased user costs to the 
public” was “not prudent, and b[ore] on the consideration of whether that 53% differential 
constitute[d] one of an extraordinary magnitude.”  Id. at 5875–76.  The Agencies found 

that service-life costs further supported their conclusion because “a 53% difference in net 
present  values  between  Rehabilitation  Alternative  3  and  Replacement  Alternative  2 
translate[d] to increased undiscounted costs to the agencies that is nearly double.”  Id. at 
5876.                                                                     
   In February 2023, Plaintiffs filed this case, seeking declaratory and injunctive relief 
on the ground that Defendants did not comply with NEPA and section 4(f) because they 

used  cost  estimates  from  the  2016  Preliminary  Design  Report  rather  than  2022  cost 
estimates reflecting the nearly threefold increase in construction costs.  See id. at 5883 
(stating that Alternative 2 would cost $42 million using 2022 cost estimates). 
   In March 2023, MDOT awarded a nearly $50-million-dollar construction contract 
to begin the replacement project.2  In April, Plaintiffs moved for a preliminary injunction 
to halt construction of the new bridge.  In July, I denied Plaintiffs’ request for a preliminary 

injunction.  Nat’l Tr. for Historic Pres. v. Buttigieg, No. 2:23-CV-00080-LEW, 2023 WL 
4847260 (D. Me. July 28, 2023), appeal filed No. 23-1630 (1st Cir. Jul. 31, 2023).  I 
explained that Plaintiffs’ likelihood of success was not promising because the various 
NEPA regulations referenced by Plaintiffs did not require further agency action without a 
change in the project’s administrative approval or environmental impact.  See id. at *4.  I 

also reasoned that it was unlikely that the Agencies acted arbitrarily and capriciously by 
using 2016 cost estimates and concluding that the rehabilitation alternatives resulted in 
costs of an extraordinary magnitude.  See id.  I explained that Plaintiffs failed to show a 
likelihood of irreparable harm since the Bridge would not be demolished until after the new 
bridge was constructed, and I anticipated ruling on the merits before then.  See id. 




2 Though MDOT’s award of the construction contract lies outside of the administrative record, Plaintiffs 
have referenced the contract throughout the litigation, and Defendant Van Note acknowledges that a 
contract was awarded.  See Def. Van Note’s Cross-Motion for Summ. J. at 9. 
   Plaintiffs filed a notice of appeal and sought an injunction pending appeal from the 
First Circuit.  The First Circuit denied the motion without prejudice because Plaintiffs did 

not request an injunction pending appeal before me.  Plaintiffs then asked me to enjoin 
construction pending appeal, and I denied their request.  Plaintiffs later filed another motion 
with the First Circuit, seeking an injunction pending appeal.  In September, the First Circuit 
denied Plaintiffs’ renewed emergency motion for an injunction pending appeal.  The court 
explained that its “strictly limited remand did not provide the occasion for a new foray by 
the plaintiffs and, in any event, the new foray now attempted does not look especially 

promising, even were its pursuit otherwise appropriate notwithstanding our strictly limited 
remand.”  Order, No. 23-1630 (1st Cir. Sept. 8, 2023).  The parties have now filed motions 
for summary judgment on the administrative record.                        
                          DISCUSSION                                    
   The final administrative decisions contain the Agencies’ findings concerning NEPA 

and section 4(f).  Because my review is limited to the administrative record, there are no 
issues of material fact, and summary judgment is an appropriate procedure for resolving 
these challenges.3  Protect Our Lakes v. U.S. Army Corps of Eng’rs, No. 1:13-CV-402-
JDL, 2015 WL 732655, at *2 (D. Me. Feb. 20, 2015).  While each statute supplies standards 
for the Agencies to apply during their decision-making processes, my review of the 

Agencies’ determinations is governed by the Administrative Procedures Act.  See Historic 


3 Plaintiffs’ appeal of my order denying their motion for a preliminary injunction is still pending before the 
First Circuit.  Nonetheless, I may still rule on the merits.  See Contour Design, Inc. v. Chance Mold Steel 
Co., 649 F.3d 31, 33–34 (1st Cir. 2011).                                  
Bridge Found., 22 F.4th at 281 (citing Conservation L. Found. v. Fed. Highway Admin., 
24  F.3d  1465,  1471  (1st  Cir.  1994)).    The  Administrative  Procedures  Act  instructs 

reviewing courts to “hold unlawful and set aside agency action, findings, and conclusions 
found to be” “arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance 
with law.”  5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A).  NEPA and section 4(f) determinations “are subject to 
[the] highly deferential abuse of discretion standard of review.”  Conservation L. Found., 
24 F.3d at 1471; see also Airport Impact Relief, Inc. v. Wykle, 192 F.3d 197, 203 (1st Cir. 
1999) (“While this is a highly deferential standard of review, it is not a rubber stamp.”).  In 

reviewing a NEPA challenge, I must “carefully review[ ] the record and satisfy [myself] 
that the agency has made a rational decision” that is “founded on a reasoned evaluation of 
the relevant factors.”  Airport Impact Relief, Inc., 192 F.3d at 203.  My review of section 
4(f) is “more stringent.”  Save Our Heritage, Inc. v. F.A.A., 269 F.3d 49, 58 (1st Cir. 2001). 

A. The National Environmental Policy Act                                  
   NEPA requires federal agencies to “include a detailed statement of environmental 

consequences known as an environmental impact statement ‘in every recommendation or 
report on proposals for legislation and other major Federal actions significantly affecting 
the quality of the human environment.’”  Kleppe v. Sierra Club, 427 U.S. 390, 394 (1976) 
(footnote omitted) (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 4332(2)(C) (1975)).  Draft or final environmental 
impact statements must be supplemented “if a major Federal action remains to occur, and” 

either “[t]he agency makes substantial changes to the proposed action that are relevant to 
environmental  concerns”  or  there  are  “significant  new  circumstances  or  information 
relevant to environmental concerns and bearing on the proposed action or its impacts.”4  40 
C.F.R. § 1502.9(d); see also 23 C.F.R. § 771.130(a) (requiring environmental impact 

statements to be supplemented when the Administration determines that “[c]hanges to the 
proposed action would result in significant environmental impacts that were not evaluated 
in  the  EIS”  or  when  “[n]ew  information  or  circumstances  relevant  to  environmental 
concerns and bearing on the proposed action or its impacts would result in significant 
environmental impacts not evaluated in the EIS”); accord Marsh v. Oregon Nat. Res. 
Council, 490 U.S. 360, 374 (1989) (explaining that “NEPA does require that agencies take 

a ‘hard look’ at the environmental effects of their planned action, even after a proposal has 
received initial approval” and that “the value of the new information to the still pending 
decision-making process” determines whether an EIS must be supplemented).  FHWA 
“must determine, prior to granting any new approval related to an action or amending any 
previously approved aspect of an action, including mitigation commitments, whether an 

approved environmental document remains valid.”  23 C.F.R. § 771.129.     
   NEPA’s  “requirements  are  procedural  in  nature.”    United  States  v.  Coal.  for 
Buzzards Bay, 644 F.3d 26, 31 (1st Cir. 2011) (citing Dep’t of Transp. v. Pub. Citizen, 541 
U.S. 752, 756 (2004)).  Thus, so “long as the environmental effects of a proposed action 
have been adequately identified and studied, the agency is free to weigh those effects and 


4 The Federal Defendants maintain that 40 C.F.R. § 1502.9(c)(1)(ii) (2019) is the operative version of the 
regulation for purposes of this litigation because FHWA’s NEPA review concluded then.  That regulation 
was renumbered to 40 C.F.R. § 1502.9(d)(1)(ii) in 2020.  Because Plaintiffs are raising arguments 
concerning Defendants’ ongoing NEPA obligations, the current version of the regulation applies to this 
case.  I also note that the operative language between the 2019 regulation and the present regulation is the 
same.                                                                     
decide—within the limits fixed by the APA—that other values overbalance environmental 
costs.”  Id. (citing Robertson v. Methow Valley Citizens Council, 490 U.S. 332, 350 

(1989)).                                                                  
   Plaintiffs contend that NEPA and related federal regulations require the Agencies 
to produce supplemental documents to reflect the increased costs of constructing a new 
bridge.  Defendants disagree and argue that I cannot consider the merits of these arguments 
because they were rejected by the First Circuit and are outside of the scope of the First 
Circuit’s limited remand.  On the merits, Defendants argue that supplemental documents 

are not required since only the project’s cost—rather than its environmental impact—has 
changed.                                                                  
1.  The Mandate Rule                                                    

   Defendants  argue  that  the  First  Circuit  already  addressed  Plaintiffs’  NEPA 
arguments and that the scope of the First Circuit’s remand prohibits me from considering 
the merits of Plaintiffs’ contentions.5  Plaintiffs disagree, reasoning that they have raised 

new  NEPA  arguments  stemming  from  the  increase  in  construction  costs  and  that 
Defendants must still comply with NEPA despite the First Circuit’s remand instructions. 
   The  “appellate  mandate  constrains  the  scope  of  proceedings  on  remand”  by 
requiring “a court to ‘scrupulously and fully’ carry out a higher court’s order after remand.”  
Diaz v. Jiten Hotel Mgmt., Inc., 741 F.3d 170, 175 (1st Cir. 2013) (quoting Doe v. Chao, 


5 The Federal Defendants contend that Plaintiffs attempted to fashion a new NEPA claim in their reply 
brief.  I do not, however, read Plaintiffs’ reply brief as raising a new NEPA claim; instead, I understand the 
Plaintiffs to be responding to Defendants’ arguments about the mandate rule. 
511 F.3d 461, 464 (4th Cir. 2007)).  “On remand, courts are often confronted with issues 
that were never considered by the remanding court.”  Biggins v. Hazen Paper Co., 111 F.3d 

205, 209 (1st Cir. 1997).  In these circumstances, the district court may address “any issue 
not expressly or impliedly disposed of on appeal.”  Id. (quoting Stevens v. F/V Bonnie 
Doon, 731 F.2d 1433, 1435 (9th Cir. 1984) (per curiam)).                  
   Because Plaintiffs’ arguments concern whether Defendants complied with their 
ongoing NEPA obligations and were not addressed by the First Circuit, the mandate rule 
is inapplicable.  By considering Plaintiffs’ NEPA arguments, I am not providing the 

Plaintiffs with a second chance to relitigate matters already rejected by the First Circuit.  
Plaintiffs argued on appeal that declining to conduct life-cycle cost analysis was “highly 
controversial,”  so  FHWA  had  to  conduct  a  full  EIS  under  then-existing  regulations.  
Historic Bridge Found., 22 F.4th at 284 n.11 (quoting 40 C.F.R. § 1508.27(b)(4) (2018) 
(amended by 85 Fed. Reg. 43,304, 43,322 (July 16, 2020))).  The First Circuit rejected this 

argument, see id., which concerned a different (and now-repealed) NEPA regulation.  
While Plaintiffs previously presented other NEPA arguments to me, see Historic Bridge 
Found., 517 F. Supp. 3d at 18–21, they did not appeal my conclusions, see Historic Bridge 
Found., 22 F.4th at 280 n.6.  Because Plaintiffs present new NEPA arguments in light of 
the subsequent change in construction costs, their arguments were not disposed of on 

appeal, so I may consider the merits of their arguments.  See Biggins, 111 F.3d at 209 
(“Broadly speaking, mandates require respect for what the higher court decided, not for 
what it did not decide.”).                                                
2.  The Merits                                                          

   On  the  merits,  Plaintiffs  cite  a  slew  of  regulations  and  caselaw  to  argue  that 
Defendants are required to produce supplemental documents because construction costs 
have increased.  But none of these regulations require further action simply because of a 
subsequent change in construction costs.                                  

   First, Plaintiffs cite 23 C.F.R. § 771.129, which requires FHWA to “determine, prior 
to granting any new approval related to an action or amending any previously approved 
aspect of an action” whether “an approved environmental document remains valid.”  This 
regulation is inapplicable because there has been no new approval or amendment to a 
previously  approved  aspect  of  this  project.   Plaintiffs’  discussion  of  cases  analyzing 
whether environmental assessments prepared years earlier remained valid is unpersuasive 

because those cases involved updated construction plans and thus differing environmental 
consequences.  See Price Rd. Neighborhood Ass’n, Inc. v. U.S. Dep’t of Transp., 113 F.3d 
1505, 1509 (9th Cir. 1997) (holding that “conducting an environmental reevaluation is an 
appropriate procedure for the FHWA to determine the significance of the impacts produced 
by the modified design and whether a supplemental EA is required”); Potomac Heritage 

Trail Ass’n, Inc. v. U.S. Dep’t of Transp., No. 8:22-CV-02482-DLB, 2022 WL 7051160, 
at *4 (D. Md. Oct. 11, 2022) (explaining that there was a re-evaluation “in light of the 
current updated bridge design” to determine if a previous Finding of No Significant Impact 
and Final Section 4(f) Evaluation “remained valid”).  Here, by contrast, the construction 
plan and corresponding environmental impact have remained the same—only construction 
costs have changed.                                                       

   Second, Plaintiffs reference 40 C.F.R. § 1502.9(d)(1)(ii), which requires agencies 
to  prepare  supplemental  environmental  impact  statements  when  agencies  make 
“substantial changes to the proposed action that are relevant to environmental concerns,” 
or there are “significant new circumstances or information relevant to environmental 
concerns and bearing on the proposed action or its impacts.”  This regulation’s plain text 
indicates that there must be some change relevant to environmental concerns, and that is 

lacking here.                                                             
   Third, Plaintiffs point to 23 C.F.R. § 771.130’s requirements concerning when an 
environmental impact statement must be supplemented.  A supplemental environmental 
impact statement is required when FHWA determines that “[c]hanges to the proposed 
action would result in significant environmental impacts that were not evaluated in the 

EIS,” or “[n]ew information or circumstances relevant to environmental concerns and 
bearing on the proposed action or its impacts would result in significant environmental 
impacts not evaluated in the EIS.”  23 C.F.R. § 771.130(a).  Plaintiffs’ reading of this 
regulation is similarly flawed.  Without a change to a project’s environmental impact, there 
can be no change resulting in significant environmental impacts not previously evaluated. 

   Plaintiffs’ discussion of caselaw is also unpersuasive.  Plaintiffs quote the Supreme 
Court’s opinion in Marsh v. Oregon Natural Resources Council, where the Court explained 
that “NEPA does require that agencies take a ‘hard look’ at the environmental effects of 
their planned action, even after a proposal has received initial approval.”  490 U.S. at 374.  
An agency’s obligation “turns on the value of the new information to the still pending 
decisionmaking process.”  Id.  If “there remains ‘major Federal actio[n]’ to occur, and if 

the new information is sufficient to show that the remaining action will ‘affec[t] the quality 
of the human environment’ in a significant manner or to a significant extent not already 
considered, a supplemental EIS must be prepared.”  Id. (alterations in original) (quoting 42 
U.S.C. § 4332(2)(c) (1988)).  Plaintiffs also rely on Conservation Law Foundation v. Watt, 
a case in which the district court held that the plaintiffs had demonstrated a likelihood of 
success on the merits of their claims that environmental impact statements were inadequate 

because updated information indicated that there would be 97% less oil than previously 
anticipated from the land in question.  560 F. Supp. 561, 570–71 (D. Mass. 1983), aff’d 
sub nom. Massachusetts v. Watt, 716 F.2d 946 (1st Cir. 1983).  The district court stated 
that “[i]t is apparent that a change, by several orders of magnitude, in the benefits” from a 
proposed action amounts to “‘substantial changes in the proposed action,’ directly relevant 

to the reasoned decision-making and balancing of environmental cost against economic 
benefit that NEPA requires.”  Id. at 571 (quoting 40 C.F.R. § 1502.9(c)(2) (1983)).  The 
First Circuit affirmed the district court, explaining that the agency erred because “the FEIS 
did not describe the likely environmental harms well enough to allow the Secretary to make 
an informed decision” because “expecting 31 times as much oil significantly affected the 

description of environmental consequences.”  Watt, 716 F.2d at 948.       
   Based on the Supreme Court’s reasoning in Marsh and the district court’s reasoning 
in Watt, Plaintiffs argue that the change in construction costs requires supplemental NEPA 
documents.  See Plaintiffs’ Opp’n & Reply at 8–9 (arguing that “a change in the cost of the 
replacement bridge by several orders of magnitude is directly relevant to the decision to 
select this environmentally harmful alternative based on the false assumption that its costs 

would supposedly be lower than the costs of the rehabilitation alternative”); see also id. at 
7 (contending that “because the lower cost of the replacement bridge was the sole basis for 
the selection of the environment damaging alternative,” using the updated costs of the 
replacement bridge “would radically affect the outcome of the Agencies’ NEPA (and 
Section 4(f)) reviews”).                                                  
   I disagree with Plaintiffs’ reading of Marsh and Watt.  Plaintiffs’ reliance on Marsh 

is misplaced because, simply put, there is no “new information” showing that this project 
will affect the quality of the human environment “in a significant manner or to a significant 
extent not already considered” since only the project’s costs have changed.  Marsh, 490 
U.S. at 374.  I also find Plaintiffs’ reliance on Watt to be unpersuasive.  Read in isolation, 
the district court’s language appears to conflate a project’s benefits with its environmental 

costs.  But the First Circuit’s opinion provides additional context explaining why that 
project’s benefit, measured by how much oil could be expected, was relevant to the 
environmental concerns.  The quantity of oil expected was directly connected to the 
resulting environmental impact since the “corresponding smaller number of platforms, 
wells,  and  pipelines  needed  to  explore  for  and  develop  these  resources”  altered  the 

environmental impact.  Watt, 716 F.2d at 949.  Thus, a supplemental EIS was required 
because the Final EIS did not “tell [the Secretary] by how much the previous FEIS estimate 
of likely environmental harm” would be reduced.  Id.  Such a connection between costs 
and the environmental impact is absent here.6                             

   Plaintiffs also rely on out-of-circuit authority.  Plaintiffs quote the Tenth Circuit’s 
decision  in  Utahns  for  Better  Transportation  v.  United  States  Department  of 
Transportation,  which  stated  that  “given  the  importance  of  the  relative  costs  to  the 
alternative analyses in the EIS, more than nothing was required.”  305 F.3d 1152, 1166 n.6 
(10th Cir. 2002), as modified on reh’g, 319 F.3d 1207 (10th Cir. 2003).  Plaintiffs argue 
that the Tenth Circuit required supplemental documents to reflect updated costs.  But this 

reads the Tenth Circuit’s comment within a footnote out of context.  The Tenth Circuit held 
that the agencies erred because they did not “verify the accuracy of information supplied 
by an applicant” or “respond to substantive issues raised in comments” as required by their 
regulations.  Id. at 1165.  The Tenth Circuit’s observation concerning costs responded to 
one alternative having no cost methodology whatsoever.  See id. at 1166 (remarking that 

“there [was] no cost methodology applicable to” an alternative “in the record” and that this 
“also demonstrate[d] why the FEIS [was] inadequate to meet the NEPA goals of informed 
decisionmaking  and  public  comment”).    Plaintiffs  also  reference  the  Sixth  Circuit’s 
decision in Coalition for Advancement of Regional Transportation v. Federal Highway 


6 The First Circuit’s more recent observation in Historic Bridge Foundation that “[w]hether an agency 
compares cost estimates of various alternatives using the appropriate methodology has no bearing on 
whether there is a controversy over the effects on ‘the quality of the human environment’” implies that cost 
is, by itself, not relevant to a project’s environmental consequences.  22 F.4th at 284 n.11 (quoting 40 C.F.R. 
§ 1508.27(b)(4) (2018) (amended by 85 Fed. Reg. 43,304, 43,322 (July 16, 2020))).  Plaintiffs attempt to 
distinguish the First Circuit’s language in Historic Bridge Foundation by arguing that the court was 
addressing a now-repealed NEPA regulation.  While that distinction is true, it does not undermine the 
inference that I draw from the First Circuit’s language.                  
Administration, 576 F. App’x 477, 483 (6th Cir. 2014), another case concerning a NEPA 
challenge to a bridge project.  That unpublished decision, however, merely noted that “[a]s 

a result of comprehensive changes to the design and funding of the Project and public 
concern  over  potential  tolling,  the  [FHWA]  and  the  States  decided  to  prepare  a 
Supplemental EIS for public review and comment.”  Id.  Notably, that case implicated a 
change to the project’s design, and the court did not require the agencies to prepare a 
supplemental EIS; instead, the agencies themselves decided to prepare it. 
   Ultimately, I reject Plaintiffs’ reading of NEPA and the applicable regulations 

because it is a textual and unsupported by caselaw.  I next consider Plaintiffs’ arguments 
regarding section 4(f).                                                   
B. Section 4(f) of the Department of Transportation Act                   

   Plaintiffs argue that the Agencies violated the First Circuit’s remand instructions as 
well as section 4(f) by using 2016 cost estimates in their section 4(f) analysis.  Plaintiffs 
argue that if updated cost estimates were used, bridge rehabilitation would be a prudent 

and feasible alternative.  Plaintiffs also contend that FHWA failed to engage in reasoned 
decision-making.  Defendants argue that they properly used 2016 cost estimates and that 
FHWA engaged in reasoned decision-making in concluding that the 53% price differential 
represented a cost of an extraordinary magnitude under 23 C.F.R. § 774.17. 
   Unlike  NEPA’s  procedural  requirements,  section  4(f)  “imposes  a  substantive 

mandate.”  Neighborhood Ass’n of the Back Bay, Inc. v. Fed. Transit Admin., 463 F.3d 50, 
64 (1st Cir. 2006).  Under section 4(f), federal agencies regulating transportation matters 
may “approve projects that entail the use of historically significant sites.”  Safeguarding 
the Historic Hanscom Area’s Irreplaceable Res., Inc. v. F.A.A., 651 F.3d 202, 207 (1st Cir. 

2011) (citing 49 U.S.C. § 303(c) (2005)).  Transportation projects requiring the use of a 
historically significant site can only be approved if “there is no prudent and feasible 
alternative to using that land,” and “the program or project includes all possible planning 
to minimize harm to the . . . historic site resulting from the use.”  49 U.S.C. § 303(c); see 
also 23 C.F.R. § 774.17 (defining what is a feasible and prudent avoidance alternative).  
These requirements “apply both when a proposal involves the physical use or occupation 

of a protected property thought to be historic and when a proposal involves indirect (but 
meaningful) effects on historic venues.”  Safeguarding, 651 F.3d at 207–08. 
   The parties agree that MDOT and FHWA’s chosen replacement alternative entails 
the use of a historic site and that each alternative considered by the Agencies was feasible 
from  an  engineering  standpoint.    The  parties  disagree  as  to  whether  the  Agencies 

reasonably concluded that the rehabilitation alternatives were imprudent because they 
involved  costs  of  an  extraordinary  magnitude.    I  first  consider  Plaintiffs’  arguments 
concerning whether the Agencies erred by using 2016 cost estimates.       

1.  Cost Estimates                                                      
   A “simple but fundamental rule of administrative law” is instructive in determining 
whether the Agencies were required to use updated costs estimates.  SEC v. Chenery Corp., 

332  U.S.  194,  196  (1947).    Under  Chenery,  “a  reviewing  court,  in  dealing  with  a 
determination or judgment which an administrative agency alone is authorized to make, 
must judge the propriety of such action solely by the grounds invoked by the agency.”  Id.  
Thus, if an agency’s proffered reasons “are inadequate, a court may remand for the agency” 

to “offer ‘a fuller explanation of the agency’s reasoning at the time of the agency action.’”  
Dep’t of Homeland Sec. v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal., 140 S. Ct. 1891, 1907 (2020) 
(quoting Pension Benefit Guar. Corp. v. LTV Corp., 496 U.S. 633, 654 (1990)).  This “has 
important  limitations”  because  when  “an  agency’s  initial  explanation ‘indicate[s]  the 
determinative reason for the final action taken,’ the agency may elaborate later on that 
reason (or reasons) but may not provide new ones.”  Id. at 1908 (quoting Camp v. Pitts, 

411 U.S. 138, 143 (1973) (per curiam) (alteration in original)).          
   Thus, FHWA could offer a fuller explanation of why the rehabilitation alternatives 
were imprudent  as  entailing  costs  of  an  extraordinary  magnitude following  the First 
Circuit’s remand.  But in elaborating on its reasoning, FHWA was required to use the 2016 
cost estimates because those estimates were before the agency “at the time of the agency 

action.”  See id. at 1907.                                                
   By using the 2016 cost estimates, the Agencies also complied with the First Circuit’s 
remand instructions.  The First Circuit remanded “with instructions that the matter be 
returned to the FHWA for the strictly limited purpose of allowing the agency to further 
justify use of the service-life analysis and/or to decide whether a 53% price differential 

represents a cost of an extraordinary magnitude under 23 C.F.R. § 774.17.”  Historic 
Bridge Found., 22 F.4th at 286.  The First Circuit invoked the Chenery rule by explaining 
that “it is for the FHWA, not this court (or counsel on appeal), to make the judgment call 
in the first instance regarding whether the 53% delta represents an extraordinary cost 
increase against which prudence counsels.”  Id. (citing Chenery Corp., 332 U.S. at 196).  
The court’s language about the 53% price differential clearly referenced the court’s earlier 

discussion about the cost differential between replacement and rehabilitation alternatives 
when using LCCA and the 2016 cost estimates.  See id. (discussing the 53% difference).  
More recently, the First Circuit, in denying Plaintiffs’ renewed emergency motion for an 
injunction pending appeal, suggested that this reading of the remand order is correct by 
explaining that its “strictly limited remand did not provide the occasion for a new foray by 
the plaintiffs.”  Order, No. 23-1630 (1st Cir. Sept. 8, 2023).            

   Therefore, I conclude that the Agencies correctly used 2016 cost estimates.7  I next 
consider Plaintiffs’ arguments concerning whether FHWA engaged in reasoned decision-
making.                                                                   

2.  Reasoned Decision-making                                            
   Lastly, Plaintiffs contend that FHWA failed to engage in reasoned decision-making 
in concluding that the 53% price differential was a cost of an extraordinary magnitude.  

Plaintiffs characterize FHWA as simply rubberstamping its previous conclusion and stating 
that service-life cost analysis is valid.  Plaintiffs also argue that the Agencies gave no 
weight to the historic value of the Bridge and that the Agencies cannot rely on notions of 
safety and efficiency in this context.  Defendants contend that FHWA engaged in reasoned 
decision-making.                                                          


7 Because the Agencies’ section 4(f) analysis properly used the 2016 cost estimates, it is unnecessary to 
consider Plaintiffs’ arguments concerning whether the rehabilitation alternatives would be a prudent and 
feasible alternative if 2022 cost estimates were used.                    
   Plaintiffs’ arguments fall apart after reviewing the Section 4(f) Limited Scope Re-
Evaluation.  In that document, FHWA complied with my remand order by thoroughly 

describing its methodology for calculating life-cycle costs.  AR 186 at 5869–74.  First, 
FHWA calculated the service life and estimated costs of the Alternatives.  Id. at 5869–71.  
Second, FHWA applied a present-value calculation to future expenditures to permit a 
comparison of the present costs for each Alternative.  Id. at 5871–72.  Third, FHWA made 
an adjustment to the rehabilitation alternatives so they could be compared to an equivalent 
analysis period of 100 years.  Id. at 5872.  Fourth, FHWA provided the estimated life-cycle 

and service-life costs for the Alternatives.  Id. at 5873–74.  Based on this analysis, the 
replacement project under Alternative 2 entailed a discounted LCCA value of $13,720,000.  
Alternative  3,  the  cheaper  rehabilitation  project,  had  a  discounted  LCCA  value  of 
$20,990,000, which is 53% higher than Alternative 2.  See id. at 5874.  “Based upon this 
consideration  alone,”  FHWA  concluded  that  “Alternatives  3  and  4  present  costs  of 

extraordinary magnitude and are not prudent avoidance alternatives.”  Id. at 5875. 
   FHWA   and  MDOT  “also  considered  additional  factors  that  support  this 
conclusion,” such as the rehabilitation alternatives requiring “the State of Maine to bear 
the costs and risks of keeping a Fracture Critical Bridge in the State Asset Inventory.”  Id. 
at 5875.  FHWA explained that “there is added risk and uncertainty to keeping a fracture 

critical  bridge  in  service  beyond  its  intended  service  life,  even  if  it  is  extensively 
rehabilitated.”  Id.  While the cost analyses reflect the increased costs for inspection and 
future routine maintenance, the costs analyses “do not fully capture the risk of unexpected 
but needed repairs or rehabilitations.  If a fracture critical component were to fail, it could 
cause a bridge to collapse.”  Id.  FHWA further expressed concern over “the cost of the 
inspections  and  the  disruptions  they  cause.”    The  Agencies  also  “took  account  of 

differences in Service Life Cost[s] between the various alternatives given that inquiry 
reflects [MDOT’s] funding realities and limited ability to budget for future costs.”  Id.  
FHWA reasoned that “the difference in cost estimates under the Service Life Cost analysis 
makes  the  substantial  differences  in  cost  between  the  replacement  and  rehabilitation 
alternatives more apparent.”  Id. at 5876.  FHWA explained that           

   the increased challenges presented by the rehabilitation options are relevant 
   to assessing the magnitude of cost differences among the alternatives and 
   determining if additional expenditure for an avoidance alternative is prudent.  
   Spending 53% more money to rehabilitate, maintain, and frequently inspect 
   a fracture critical bridge that comes with more stringent and costly federal 
   inspection requirements, traffic impacts, and increased user costs to the 
   public is not prudent, and bears on the consideration of whether that 53% 
   differential constitutes one of an extraordinary magnitude.          

Id. at 5875–76.                                                           
   While Plaintiffs attempt to characterize FHWA as only making a “passing reference 
to [the] relevant factors” and rubberstamping its previous conclusion, I find that FHWA 
sufficiently articulated the basis for its decision using the proper factors under 23 CFR 
§ 774.17.  Missouri Pub. Serv. Comm’n v. FERC, 234 F.3d 36, 41 (D.C. Cir. 2000).  FHWA 
explained the factors relevant to its analysis in deciding whether an alternative is prudent, 
see AR at 5877, and adequately explained that the difference in life-cycle costs was a cost 
of extraordinary magnitude.  I also reject Plaintiffs’ argument that the Agencies merely 
asserted that service-life costs were valid because the Agencies explained how service-life 
costs further supported its conclusion reached through LCCA.  See id. at 5876. 
   Plaintiffs also argue that FHWA gave no weight to the value of section 4(f)-
protected historic properties being destroyed and that because the price of the rehabilitation 

alternatives  was  the  basis  for  rejecting  those  alternatives,  the  cost rationale  must  be 
balanced against the value of protecting historic properties.  The Agencies contend that 
section 4(f) and FHWA’s regulations define the scope of protections for historic properties 
and that a site’s historic value is not entitled to additional weight.    
   Plaintiffs’ argument that the Bridge’s historic value was given insufficient weight 
relies on Citizens to Preserve Overton Park, Inc. v. Volpe.  401 U.S. 402 (1971).  There, 

plaintiffs sued to enjoin the Secretary of Transportation from releasing federal funds to a 
state highway department to construct a segment of an expressway through a city park.  Id. 
at 406.  The plaintiffs argued that there was a “feasible and prudent” alternative route.  Id. 
at 405.  In its analysis, the Court explained that “the very existence of” statutes, like section 
4(f), “indicates that protection of parkland was to be given paramount importance.”  Id. at 

412–13.                                                                   
   Plaintiffs latch onto the “paramount importance” language and argue that FHWA 
was required to give additional weight to the historic value of the Bridge.  Interpreting 
section 4(f) in light of Overton Park, the Seventh Circuit has recognized that “the reasons 
for using” “protected land have to be good ones, pressing ones, well thought out.”  Eagle 

Found.,  Inc.  v.  Dole,  813  F.2d  798,  805 (7th  Cir.  1987).    But  even after  “a strong 
presumption” against using protected land, “it may be prudent to use the § 4(f) land.  If the 
Secretary makes that hard decision, it must be respected.”  Id.  Here, the Secretary has 
made that determination and acted consistently with section 4(f) and applicable regulations.  
Contrary to Plaintiffs’ argument, FHWA did consider the Bridge’s historic value in the 
2019 Section 4(f) Evaluation, see AR 9 at 1182–1185, which the Limited Scope Section 

4(f) Re-Evaluation supplements.  See AR 186 at 5878 (explaining that “[a]ll other portions 
of the 2019 Section 4(f) Evaluation remain unchanged”).                   
   Plaintiffs also fault FHWA’s finding of imprudence based on safety and efficiency 
because,  in  their  view,  such  a  “wide-ranging  balancing  of  competing  interests”  is 
impermissible.8  Citizens to Pres. Overton  Park, Inc., 401 U.S. at 411.  Defendants 
maintain that these considerations are proper since FHWA must determine whether a 

proposal is “prudent.”                                                    
   In Overton Park, the Supreme Court explained that it was improper for the Secretary 
of Transportation to weigh “the detriment resulting from the destruction of parkland against 
the cost of other routes, safety considerations, and other factors” to determine “on the basis 
of the importance that he attaches to these other factors whether, on balance, alternative 

feasible routes would be ‘prudent.’”  Id. at 411–12.  The Court emphasized that these 
factors, which “are common to substantially all highway construction” projects, would be 
improper to consider because “if Congress intended these factors to be on an equal footing 
with [the] preservation of parkland[,] there would have been no need for the[se] statutes” 
protecting parkland.  Id. at 412.  Thus, explained the Court, “the Secretary cannot approve 


8 Plaintiffs also contend that FHWA’s reliance on “safety” and “efficiency” is a post-hoc rationalization 
since the Agencies are relying on “fictional assumptions about costs.”  Plaintiffs’ Opp’n & Reply at 18.  
This argument fails.  As I have explained above, the Agencies correctly used 2016 cost estimates.  
Furthermore, the Limited Scope Section 4(f) Re-Evaluation considered safety concerns and explained why 
it would be more efficient to construct a new bridge, so the references to safety and efficiency were not 
post-hoc rationalizations for litigation.  AR 186 at 5875–77.             
the destruction of parkland unless he finds that alternative routes present unique problems.”  
Id. at 413.                                                               

   Plaintiffs argue that FHWA’s reliance on safety and efficiency is akin to the “wide-
ranging balancing of competing interests” that the Overton Park Court forbade.  Id. at 411.  
I disagree.  As the First Circuit has explained, the Supreme Court’s explanation in Overton 
Park was “situation-specific” and “tailored to fit situations in which, from a practical 
standpoint, there otherwise would be a perverse incentive in favor of using protected land 
for federal transportation projects.”  Safeguarding, 651 F.3d at 208.  While “section 4(f) 

imposes significant obligations upon a reviewing agency,” Plaintiffs “attempt to festoon 
those obligations with magic words, selectively culled from the Overton Park opinion,” 
and thus “distort[ ] the statute and overread[ ] the Court’s teachings.”  Id. at 209.  The 
Agencies’ “obligations are what the statute says they are.”  Id.  Under section 4(f), the 
Seventh Circuit has explained that a “prudent judgment by an agency is one that takes into 

account everything important that matters.  A cumulation of small problems may add up to 
a sufficient reason to use § 4(f) lands.”  Eagle Found., Inc, 813 F.2d at 805; see also 
Safeguarding, 651 F.3d at 211 (“An agency legitimately may invoke an accumulation of 
factors to rule out an alternative as imprudent.” (citing Eagle Found., Inc, 813 F.2d at 805)).  
Thus, in a case involving the demolition of an existing hangar and construction of a new 

fixed based operator facility, the First Circuit reasoned that “[i]n this context, prudence is 
largely a matter of safety and efficiency.”  Safeguarding, 651 F.3d at 213. 
   FHWA’s reasoning rested on the difference in life-cycle costs.  See AR 186 at 5875 
(“Based on this consideration alone, FHWA concludes that Alternatives 3 and 4 present 
costs of extraordinary magnitude and are not prudent avoidance alternatives.”).  However, 
FHWA’s regulations recognize that considerations of safety and efficiency are relevant to 

whether an alternative is prudent.  See 23 C.F.R. § 774.17 (explaining that an “alternative 
is not prudent if” it “results in unacceptable safety or operational problems” or “results in 
additional construction, maintenance, or operational costs of an extraordinary magnitude”); 
see also Eagle Found., Inc., 813 F.2d at 804 (“For some statutes cost is no object.  Nothing 
in the language or legislative history of § 4(f) suggests such an extreme position, and the 
statutory use of ‘prudent’ cuts the other way.” (internal citation omitted)).  Thus, FHWA 

did not err by explaining how safety and efficiency concerns further supported their 
conclusion reached through life-cycle cost analysis.                      
                         CONCLUSION                                     
   The Agencies’ “determination that none of the [rehabilitation] alternatives would be 
prudent was, on the record before [them], well within the universe of reasonable outcomes.  

When that is true, it is not the place of a reviewing court to second-guess the agenc[ies].”  
Safeguarding, 651 F.3d at 213.  Thus, Plaintiffs’ Motion for Summary Judgment (ECF No. 
46)  is  DENIED;  Defendant  Commissioner  Van  Note’s  Cross-motion  for  Summary 
Judgment  (ECF  No.  49)  is  GRANTED;  and  Federal  Defendants’  Cross-motion  for 
Summary Judgment (ECF No. 50) is GRANTED.                                 

   SO ORDERED.                                                          
   Dated this 5th day of January 2024.                                  
                             /s/ Lance E. Walker                        
                              UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            

                   DISTRICT OF MAINE                                 


NATIONAL TRUST FOR HISTORIC   )                                           
PRESERVATION, et al.,         )                                           
                         )                                           
Plaintiffs,                   )                                           
                         )                                           
v.                       )    No. 2:23-cv-00080-LEW                  
                         )                                           
PETE BUTTIGIEG, SECRETARY,    )                                           
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF            )                                           
TRANSPORTATION, et al.,       )                                           
                         )                                           
Defendants.                   )                                           

ORDER ON PLAINTIFFS’ MOTION FOR STAY PENDING APPEAL                  

Plaintiffs have appealed the denial of their motion seeking a preliminary injunction.  
In denying their motion, I concluded that they had not shown a likelihood of success on 
the merits or that they would suffer irreparable injury in the absence of injunctive relief.  
Plaintiffs now request that the Court offer more limited relief in the form of a stay pending 
the First Circuit’s review of that order.                                 
In ruling on a motion for a stay pending appeal, a court considers (1) whether the 
party requesting the stay made a strong showing of likelihood of success on the merits, (2) 
whether the party will be harmed irreparably without a stay, (3) whether other interested 
parties will experience a substantial harm if a stay is entered, and (4) relevant public 
interests in the controversy.  Dist. 4 Lodge of the Int’l Ass'n of Machinists & Aerospace 
Workers Local Lodge 207 v. Raimondo, 18 F.4th 38, 42 (1st Cir. 2021).  Most critical to 
the inquiry are the first two factors.                                    

For the reasons set forth in my Order on Motion for Preliminary Injunction (ECF 
No. 38), Plaintiffs’ request for a stay of construction activities pending appeal is DENIED. 
SO ORDERED.                                                               
Dated this 22nd day of August, 2023.                                 
                          /s/ Lance E. Walker                        
                           UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                           

                   DISTRICT OF MAINE                                 

NATIONAL TRUST FOR HISTORIC   )                                           
PRESERVATION, et al.,         )                                           
                         )                                           
     Plaintiffs,         )                                           
                         )                                           
v.                       )         No. 2:23-cv-00080-LEW             
                         )                                           
PETE BUTTIGIEG, SECRETARY,    )                                           
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF            )                                           
TRANSPORTATION, et al.,       )                                           
                         )                                           
     Defendants.         )                                           

     ORDER ON MOTION FOR PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION                      

Plaintiffs National Trust for Historic Preservation, Friends of the Frank J. Wood Bridge, 
Historic Bridge Foundation, and Waterfront Maine, Brunswick, LLC (“Plaintiffs”), petition the 
Court for preliminary injunctive relief that halts, pending further litigation, any steps to replace the 
Frank J. Wood Bridge pursuant to authorization granted by Defendants Pete Buttigieg, Secretary 
of the United States Department of Transportation, Shailen Batt, Administrator of the Federal 
Highway Administration (“FHWA”), Todd Jorgensen, Administrator of the Maine Division of the 
FHWA,  and  Bruce  Van  Note,  Commissioner  of  the  Maine  Department  of  Transportation 
(“MaineDOT”)  (collectively,  “Defendants”).    Plaintiffs  claim  that  Defendants’  decision  to 
demolish and replace the Frank J. Wood Bridge runs roughshod over historic preservation 
standards embodied in Section 4(f) of the Department of Transportation Act, 49 U.S.C. § 303(c), 
associated law governing to the preservation of parklands, 23 U.S.C. § 138(a), and procedural 
rights protected under the National Environmental Policy Act (“NEPA”), 42 U.S.C. § 4332. 
Plaintiffs Motion for Preliminary Injunction (ECF No. 15) is DENIED.   
                      BACKGROUND                                     
The municipalities of Brunswick and Topsham are divided by the Androscoggin River.  
Although there are other river crossings to the east (a bypass route) and west (I-295), the Frank J. 
Wood Bridge is a particularly important vehicular and pedestrian connection because it carries 

U.S.  Route  201  over  the  Androscoggin  River  and  ties  these  communities  together.    The 
Androscoggin Power Company built the Bridge in 1932 to carry interurban rail traffic.  It has since 
been resurfaced for vehicular traffic.  The Bridge is today a contributing resource in the Brunswick 
and Topsham Industrial Historic District, alongside the Cabot Mill and the Pejepscot Paper 
Company.  Although the Bridge is a historical asset, it presents certain attributes disfavored by 
MaineDOT.  In particular, the Bridge is in poor condition and, if retained, requires substantial 
rehabilitation.  That rehabilitation could extend the life of the Bridge by as many as 75 years, but 
ongoing safety concerns are real and regular maintenance requirements will introduce substantial 
carrying costs over and above what is expected of a new bridge structure. 
MaineDOT initiated the Frank J. Wood Bridge Improvement Project (“Project”) in 2015.  

Because federal funds would be used to construct the Project, MaineDOT applied to the FHWA, 
a division of the U.S. Department of Transportation, seeking approval of its plan.  MaineDOT and 
FHWA (together, the “Agencies”) considered several alternatives, including three replacement 
alternatives involving a steel girder bridge and two alternatives involving rehabilitation.  After a 
review process, the Agencies chose a replacement alternative.  FHWA determined that the 
rehabilitation alternatives were not prudent because they would result in additional construction, 
maintenance, or operational costs of an extraordinary magnitude.          
On September 6, 2019, a civil action was filed to prevent the Agencies from implementing 
the replacement project.  Historic Bridge Found. v. Chao, No. 2:19-cv-00408-LEW.  In February 
2021, I issued an order granting summary judgment to Defendants in that action.  On appeal, the 
First Circuit affirmed all of my conclusions but one and remanded the matter “with instructions 
that the matter be returned to the FHWA for the strictly limited purpose of allowing the agency to 
further justify use of the service-life analysis and/or to decide whether a 53% price differential 

represents a cost of an extraordinary magnitude under 23 C.F.R. § 774.17.”  Historic Bridge 
Found. v. Buttigieg, 22 F.4th 275, 286 (1st Cir. 2022).  On March 2, 2022, I issued an order of 
remand for further administrative proceedings consistent with the opinion of the First Circuit.   
On January 27, 2023, the Agencies issued a “Section 4(f) Limited Scope Re-Evaluation, 
Pursuant to 49 USC 303 Department of Transportation Act of 1966.”  (Mot. Ex. 2, ECF No. 15-
3).  Therein, the Agencies further justified their cost assessment.  In the conclusion of the Re-
Evaluation, they found that the rehabilitation alternative preferred by Plaintiffs, found in 2019 to 
present an increased cost of 53% would “result in additional construction, maintenance, and 
operational costs of an extraordinary magnitude, and therefore [is] not [a] prudent alternative[]” 
for the Agencies preferred replacement project.  Id. at 14.  Concerning its methodology, the 

Agencies explained that they were restricting their review to the remand instruction.  Id. at 2 (“The 
scope of this Re-Evaluation is limited to the conduct of an analysis directed by a United States 
District Court Order.”).  They then went on to reevaluate their determination in the context of the 
cost estimates generated in 2019, purposing to close the gap left open in the prior litigation.  
Concerning closure of that gap, they explained:                           
In  determining  whether  the  additional  expenditure  required  to  construct  an 
avoidance alternative was of an extraordinary magnitude and therefore not prudent, 
FHWA & MaineDOT considered the Present Value Life Cycle costs of Alternatives 
2,  3,  and  4.    Based  upon  this  consideration  alone,  FHWA  concludes  that 
Alternatives 3 and 4 present costs of extraordinary magnitude and are not prudent 
avoidance alternatives.  However, FHWA & MaineDOT also considered additional 
factors that support this conclusion.  In particular, the Agencies considered that 
Rehabilitation Alternatives 3 and 4 would require the State of Maine to bear the 
costs and risks of keeping a Fracture Critical Bridge in the State Asset Inventory. 
Further, the Agencies took account of differences in Service Life Cost between the 
various alternatives given that inquiry reflects MaineDOT’s funding realities and 
limited ability to budget for future costs.                          

Id. at 11.  From there, the Agencies explained that they also considered in their analysis the fact 
that “there is added risk and uncertainty to keeping a fracture critical bridge in service beyond its 
intended service life, even if it is extensively rehabilitated.”  Id.  Using discounted dollars based 
on the original life cycle costs estimates, they offered the assessment that rehabilitation is not a 
prudent alternative.                                                      
Spending 53% more money to rehabilitate, maintain, and frequently inspect a 
fracture critical bridge that comes with more stringent and costly federal inspection 
requirements, traffic impacts, and increased user costs to the public is not prudent, 
and bears on the consideration of whether that 53% differential constitutes one of 
an extraordinary magnitude.                                          

Id. at 11-12.  Additionally, using service-life considerations (the proposed rehabilitation project 
has a shorter life expectancy, meaning its higher future costs are also carried over the course of 
fewer  years),  they  also  concluded  that  “a  53%  difference  in  net  present  values  between 
Rehabilitation Alternative 3 and Replacement Alternative 2 translates to increased undiscounted 
costs to the agencies that is nearly double.”  Id. at 12.1  Given these calculations, the Agencies 
concluded that “the difference in Life Cycle Costs to construct, maintain and operate the specific 
rehabilitation  and  replacement  options  over  their  expected  life  spans  presents  a  cost  of 
extraordinary magnitude.”  Id. at 13.  Concerning the Plaintiffs’ preferred rehabilitation alternative, 
the Agencies found that “the expenditure of additional funds to construct Alternative 3, which has 
a shorter life span and leaves a fracture critical bridge in place is dismissed as not prudent per 23 
CFR 774.17 Part 3 (iv).”  Id.                                             

1 The Agencies offer that present-value discounting can be misleading insofar as the present-day discount 
for a repair slated to occur 60 years from now produces a present-day cost beneath what it would actually 
costs to perform the repair today.  Mot. Ex. 2 at 13.                     
Plaintiffs allege that by taking this approach the Agencies unlawfully disregarded requests 
by the Plaintiffs and others to consider new budgetary information (including the winning bid) 
indicating that the costs for bridge construction has escalated dramatically since the FHWA’s 2019 
decision.  They also offer an alternative cost comparison from Plaintiffs’ expert that assumes that 

the cost to rehabilitate the existing bridge has not similarly escalated.  In an addendum to the Re-
evaluation, the Agencies anticipated this contention.  They “acknowledge[d] that the current cost 
estimate for the bridge replacement project has increased since the original cost estimates were 
prepared during the NEPA process,” but rejoined that the purpose of the RE-Evaluation “is to 
respond to the remand instructions.”  Summary of Comments & Responses § C (ECF No. 15-3, 
PageID # 129).  Nonetheless, the Agencies spoke to the Plaintiffs’ alternative cost comparison, 
concluding that the alternative estimates were flawed and reasserting that future carrying costs 
“are what truly separate the two alternatives.”  Id.                      
On February 24, 2023, Plaintiffs filed a new civil action seeking declaratory and injunctive 
relief.  Plaintiffs argue that the Agencies’ failure to take a “hard look at new information” ignores 

requirements imposed on the Agencies under NEPA and associated regulations adopted by the 
Department of Transportation.  Motion at 8-12 (citing 23 C.F.R. §§ 771.129(c), 771.130(c)).  
Plaintiffs maintain that if the Agencies consider the new information they will not be able to escape 
the conclusion that “the delta between the life cycle costs of the [rehabilitating the Bridge] versus 
the replacement alternative is flipped on its head.”  Id. at 14.  Defendants respond that given the 
narrow scope of the remand order it was appropriate and lawful for the Agencies to decide not to 
conduct a reappraisal of their cost estimates as “[n]either this Court’s remand order nor the First 
Circuit opinion contemplates re-opening the record, taking new evidence, or engaging in any other 
formal process.”  Defs.’ Opp’n at 8-9 (ECF No. 16).                       
In their Opposition, Defendants state that the demolition of the Frank J. Wood Bridge is 
not planned until the end of the Project once the new bridge is open to traffic.  They report that 
project completion is scheduled for November 2026.  They also assert that further delay calls into 
question  whether  the  Frank  J.  Wood  Bridge  will  remain  serviceable  through  the  Project’s 

completion date and that any delay associated with a preliminary injunction will likely result in 
costly change orders.                                                     
On July 26, 2023, Plaintiffs filed a status report.  They explain that in response to an inquiry 
from Plaintiffs, counsel for Defendant FHWA provided the following information concerning the 
contractor’s work schedule.                                               
MDOT’s contractor, Reed and Reed Construction, has begun setting up access to 
the river, and expects to be working in the river on or about August 1 on necessary 
abutment work.  Reed and Reed is working on installing the temporary trestle, 
which will be used to assist in constructing the new bridge.  The foundations consist 
of both rock socketed pipe pile, which are drilled into the ledge, along with pipe 
pile anchored to grout pads cast on top of the ledge in locations where the piles are 
not in the water.  The contractor will eventually begin detour work involving 
sidewalks with pedestrian traffic to be shifted and temporary crosswalks installed 
with flashing lights on crosswalks at both ends of the bridge, but this work may not 
begin for some time.                                                 

This description covers the majority of what will be occurring over the next 6-9 
months. Reed and Reed plans on working throughout the winter installing the 
temporary trestle, building the abutments, and installing cofferdams for the new 
piers and abutments.                                                 

Status Report (ECF No. 29).                                               
The Court’s Scheduling Order calls for merits briefing to be complete in October of this 
year.  I anticipate that I will be in the position to issue a prompt determination very shortly 
thereafter.                                                               
                       DISCUSSION                                    
 Injunctive relief is “an extraordinary and drastic remedy that is never awarded as of 
right.” Voice of the Arab World, Inc. v. MDTV Med. News Now, Inc., 645 F.3d 26, 32 (1st Cir. 
2011) (citations and quotation marks omitted).  “To grant a preliminary injunction, a district court 

must find the following four elements satisfied: (1) a likelihood of success on the merits, (2) a 
likelihood of irreparable harm absent interim relief, (3) a balance of equities in the plaintiff’s favor, 
and (4) service of the public interest.”  Arborjet, Inc. v. Rainbow Treecare Sci. Advancements, Inc., 
794 F.3d 168, 171 (1st Cir. 2015).  As the party seeking injunctive relief, Plaintiffs bear the burden 
of establishing that the factors weigh in their favor.  See Diaz-Carrasquillo v. Garcia-Padilla, 750 
F.3d 7, 10 (1st Cir. 2014); Esso Standard Oil Co. v. Monroig-Zayas, 445 F.3d 13, 18 (1st Cir. 
2006).                                                                    
“Likelihood of success is the main bearing wall of the four-factor framework.”  Ross-
Simons of Warwick, Inc. v. Baccarat, Inc., 102 F.3d 12, 16 (1st Cir. 1996).  On this issue “the 
district court is required only to make an estimation of likelihood of success and ‘need not predict 

the eventual outcome on the merits with absolute assurance.’”  Corp. Techs., Inc. v. Harnett, 731 
F.3d 6, 10 (1st Cir. 2013) (quoting Ross–Simons, 102 F.3d at 16).  The showing required of the 
party with the burden to show it is “likely to succeed” varies depending on the relevance of the 
remaining preliminary injunction factors.  If the party fails to make a persuasive showing of 
likelihood of success, then generally it will lose the motion.  Cf. New Comm. Wireless Servs., Inc. 
v. SprintCom, Inc., 287 F.3d 1, 9 (1st Cir. 2002).  But the strength of the other three factors can 
inform the burden of showing likelihood of success.  In other words, although likelihood of success 
is the main bearing wall of the preliminary injunction standard, when the remaining factors 
strongly favor the party with the burden on the merits, a somewhat lesser showing as to the merits 
may suffice.  Cf. Hoosier Energy Rural Elec. Coop., Inc. v. John Hancock Life Ins. Co., 582 F.3d 
721, 725 (7th Cir. 2009) (Easterbrook, C.J.).  Ultimately, “trial courts have wide discretion in 
making judgments regarding the appropriateness of such relief.”  Francisco Sánchez v. Esso 
Standard Oil Co., 572 F.3d 1, 14 (1st Cir. 2009).                         

A.   Likelihood of Success                                                
Plaintiffs maintain that the Agencies are required to evaluate present conditions and 
essentially conduct a do-over in terms of cost calculations.  They rely chiefly on 23 C.F.R. § 
771.129  (“Re-evaluations”),  which  instructs  the  FHWA  to  determine  whether  an  approved 
environmental document remains valid prior to granting any new approval or amending a prior 
approval pursuant to the Transportation Act.  I am not convinced that the regulation will carry the 
day for Plaintiffs.  Nothing has changed in terms of the administrative approval.  The Re-evaluation 
closes a gap the Agencies were ordered to address in the order of remand; the Re-evaluation does 
not propose to grant approval for any new or amended action not previously approved.   
Plaintiffs also point to 40 C.F.R. § 1502.9 (“Draft, final, and supplemental statements”), 

which instructs agencies to prepare supplemental NEPA environmental impact statements when 
they intend to make a substantial change to a proposed action or there are significant new 
circumstances “relevant to environmental concerns.”  I am not convinced that this argument will 
serve, either, given that the environmental impact has not changed.       
Finally, I am not convinced that it is likely I will find that the Agencies have conducted 
themselves in an arbitrary fashion by cabining their reevaluation process to the dictates of the 
remand order or in finding that the rehabilitation alternative results in a cost differential of an 
extraordinary magnitude.                                                  
B.   Irreparable Harm                                                     
The irreparable harm factor, similarly, does not require an injunction.  The Project relies 
on the Frank J. Wood Bridge to carry traffic until the replacement bridge is constructed.  Given 
the schedule in place for merits briefing, I anticipate an order on the merits this fall.  Plaintiffs 

have not persuaded me that a fall ruling will come too late to ensure preservation of the Frank J. 
Wood Bridge in the event they succeed on the merits.                      
C.   Equitable Considerations                                             
Given the foregoing discussion, I find at best equipoise.            
D.   Public Interest                                                      
The public interest here is, similarly, in equipoise at best.  For example, although by no 
means determinative, the elected officials of both Brunswick and Topsham have issued recent 
resolutions finding it to be in the public interest to replace the Frank J. Wood Bridge.   
                       CONCLUSION                                    
Plaintiffs’ Motion for Injunctive Relief is DENIED.                  

SO ORDERED.                                                               

Dated this 28th day of July, 2023.                                   

                          /s/ Lance E. Walker                        
                          UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE