United States District Court                            
               District of Massachusetts                             

                               )                                     
BRAD O’BRIEN, as personal           )                                     
representative of the Estate of     )                                     
Melissa Allen,                      )                                     
                               )                                     
     Plaintiff,                )    Civil Action No.                 
                               )    21-10621-NMG                     
     v.                        )                                     
                               )                                     
LOWELL GENERAL HOSPITAL et al.,     )                                     
                               )                                     
     Defendants.               ))                                    

                  MEMORANDUM & ORDER                                 
GORTON, J.                                                                
This action was filed after the death of Melissa Allen               
(“Allen”) in August, 2016, that allegedly resulted from her               
treatment by Dr. Fernando Roca (“Dr. Roca”) in July, 2016 at              
Lowell General Hospital (“the Hospital”) in Massachusetts.                
Pending before the Court is 1) a motion by defendant, the United          
States (“the government”), to reinstate this Court’s prior                
decision granting dismissal or, alternatively, to dismiss for             
failure to state a claim, and 2) a motion by plaintiff Brad               
O’Brien (“O’Brien” or “the plaintiff”) for reconsideration of             
this Court’s March 1, 2024 order.  For the following reasons,             
the motion to reinstate will be allowed and the motion for                
reconsideration will be denied.                                           
I.   Factual and Procedural Background                                    
In 2016, Allen was admitted to the Hospital after suffering          
multiple seizures at her residence.  Although Allen was unaware           

of the fact, she was found to be pregnant at the time and was             
treated at the Hospital by the attending obstetrician, Dr. Roca.          
After delivering her child, Allen was transported to Tufts                
Medical Center in Boston where she died 11 days later from                
medical complications related to her pregnancy.                           
In June, 2019, plaintiff filed suit in the Massachusetts             
Superior Court for Middlesex County against Dr. Roca and several          
other Hospital employees alleging, inter alia, negligence in              
their treatment of Allen.  In 2021, the government removed that           
action to this Court pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 233(c) and noticed           
the substitution of the government for Dr. Roca on the same day.          

Shortly thereafter, the government moved to dismiss plaintiff’s           
complaint for lack of subject matter jurisdiction and for                 
failure to state a claim.  This Court allowed that motion,                
holding that under the Federal Employees Liability Reform and             
Tort Compensation Act (“the Westfall Act”), the government was            
properly substituted for Dr. Roca and that, accordingly,                  
plaintiff's claims were time-barred by the two-year limitations           
period under the Federal Tort Claims Act (“the FTCA”).                    
Plaintiff appealed the decision to the First Circuit Court           
of Appeals in 2022.  On appeal, the government disavowed its              
prior reliance on the Westfall Act and urged the First Circuit            
to affirm on a new basis, namely, that substitution was proper            
under the Public Health Service Act (“PHSA”).  The First Circuit          
held that there was an insufficient evidentiary record to                 
determine, on this new basis, whether the government’s reason             

for substitution was proper and vacated and remanded the case to          
this Court. See O’Brien v. United States, 56 F.4th 139 (1st Cir.          
2022).                                                                    
On remand in March, 2024, after consideration of                     
comprehensive briefs submitted by the parties, this Court held            
that Dr. Roca was properly deemed a Public Health Service                 
employee and allowed the government’s motion to substitute as             
defendant.  Now, the government moves to reinstate this Court’s           
2021 order of dismissal and, alternatively, seeks to renew its            
motion to dismiss for lack of subject matter jurisdiction under           
Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(1) and for failure to state a claim under           
Rule 12(b)(6).  Plaintiff objects to such reinstatement and               

moves for reconsideration in light of the Supreme Court’s                 
intervening decision in Loper Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo,             
144 S. Ct. 2244, 2247 (2024).  Given the high degree of inter-            
relatedness between the issues raised in these motions, the               
Court will address them together.                                         
III. Motion to Dismiss and Motion for Reconsideration                     
A. Legal Standard                                                    

In opposing a motion to dismiss for lack of subject matter           
jurisdiction under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(1), the plaintiff bears          
the burden of establishing that the Court has jurisdiction.               
Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 561 (1992).                 
Jurisdiction to sue the United States must be found in an                 
express Congressional waiver of immunity and, in general, such            
statutes are strictly construed. Murphy v. United States, 45              
F.3d 520, 522 (1st Cir. 1995).  Unless a suit falls within the            
terms of a waiver, jurisdiction cannot be maintained. United              

States v. White Mountain Apache Tribe, 573 U.S. 465, 472 (2003).          
To survive a motion to dismiss under Fed. R. Civ. P.                 
12(b)(6), a party’s complaint must contain sufficient factual             
allegations to state a claim for relief that is actionable as a           
matter of law and is “plausible on its face.” Ashcroft v. Iqbal,          
556 U.S. 662, 678 (2009) (quoting Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly,             
550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007)). A claim is facially plausible if,              
after accepting as true all non-conclusory factual allegations,           
the court can draw the reasonable inference that the defendant            
is liable for the misconduct alleged. Ocasio-Hernandez v.                 
Fortuno-Burset, 640 F.3d 1, 12 (1st Cir. 2011).                           
Under Fed. R. Civ. P. 59, a motion to alter or amend a               
judgment may be granted under Rule 59 only if the movant                  
demonstrates that an intervening change in controlling law, a             
clear legal error, or newly discovered evidence warrants                  
modification of the judgment. In re Genzyme Corp. Sec. Litig.,            

754 F.3d 31, 46 (1st Cir. 2014) (citing Fed. R. Civ. P. 59).              
B. Analysis                                                          
Plaintiff raises three arguments in opposition to the                
government’s motion to reinstate the Court’s prior dismissal: 1)          
that plaintiff’s claim is not time-barred by the two-year                 
statute of limitations under the FTCA, 2) that he was entitled            

additional time to exhaust administrative remedies under the              
Westfall Act’s savings provision, and 3) that the government was          
improperly substituted as defendant in place of Dr. Roca.                 
Plaintiff’s arguments are necessarily rejected at the outset              
because they challenge the law of the case that the Court may             
not reconsider.                                                           
The well-established law of the case doctrine forecloses             
the Court from reopening consideration of legal conclusions that          
were reached in an earlier stage of litigation, absent reversal           
of those conclusions by an appellate court. See Ellis v. United           
States, 313 F.3d 636, 646 (1st Cir. 2002).  The First Circuit             
has identified this rule as a “prudential principle” that seeks           
to avoid “relitigation” of matters. United States v. Vigneau,             
337 F.3d 62, 67–68 (1st Cir. 2003).  There are only three narrow          
exceptions to the law of the case doctrine, which arise in                
“exceptional circumstances”: 1) where “controlling legal                  
authority has changed dramatically,” 2) where a party “proffers           

significant new evidence” that was “not earlier obtainable,” or           
3) where the Court committed a “blatant error” in its prior               
decision that will result in a “serious injustice.” Id. at 68.            
     1.  Previous Law of the Case                                    
Plaintiff’s arguments were all previously litigated and              
decided by this Court in this case. Namely, the Court decided in          

its 2021 dismissal order that the accrual of plaintiff’s claim            
coincided with the date of Allen’s injury on July 26, 2016, and           
that plaintiff did not file the underlying action until more              
than two years after the date of accrual, on June 20, 2019.  As           
explained, the FTCA requires a plaintiff first to present his             
claim to an appropriate federal agency within two years after             
the claim accrues. 28 U.S.C. §§ 2401(b), 2675(a).  A tort claim           
typically accrues at the time of injury.  McIntyre v. United              
States, 367 F.3d 38, 51 (1st Cir. 2004).  Under the discovery             
rule exception, however, a claim only accrues when the plaintiff          
“knows both the existence and the cause of his injury.” Id. at            
51 (citing United States v. Kubrick, 444 U.S. 111 (1979)).  The           
Court previously held that plaintiff’s claim here was untimely,           
Plaintiff does not dispute his failure to present a claim            
to any federal agency.  It is also undisputed that more              
than two years has elapsed since the date of the alleged             
injury . . . . The discovery rule does not apply to the              
injuries here at issue . . . . Rather, the factual basis             
for the instant claim, i.e. the injury and the identity of           
Dr. Roca, were known to him by August, 2016, at the latest.          

O’Brien v. Lowell Gen. Hosp., No. CV 21-10621-NMG, 2021 WL                
5111857, at *3 (D. Mass. Nov. 3, 2021).  Similarly, the Court             
determined in 2021 that plaintiff cannot rely on the savings              
provision of the Westfall Act to make his claim timely.  The              
Westfall Act provides an exception to the FTCA’s two-year                 
limitations period.  28 U.S.C. § 2679(d)(5).  Under its savings           
provision, an otherwise untimely claim can survive if,                    
[T]he claim is presented to the appropriate Federal agency           
within 60 days after dismissal [and] the claim would have            
been timely had it been filed on the date the underlying             
civil action was commenced.                                          

Id.  But on these facts, the Court held that the subject                  
provision does not apply,                                                 
[T]he state court action was commenced on June 20, 2019,             
more than two years after the treatment provided to                  
decedent by Dr. Roca.  An administrative action filed on             
that date would not have been timely, and thus § 2679(d)(5)          
[of the Westfall Act] does not save the claims from the              
statute of limitations set forth [in FTCA] in § 2401(b).             

O’Brien, 2021 WL 5111857, at *4.  Finally, the Court determined           
in March, 2024, after a remand from the First Circuit, and                
further briefing by the parties, that the government was                  
properly substituted for Dr. Roca as a defendant in this case.            
Employees of the Public Health Service (“PHS”) are protected              
from liability under the Public Health Services Act (“PHSA”),             
which requires removal to federal court upon the Attorney                 
General's certification that the PHS employee acted within the            

scope of his or her employment. 42 U.S.C. § 233(c).  Once in              
federal court, the government is substituted as the defendant             
and an action under the FTCA becomes the exclusive remedy. 42             
U.S.C. § 233(a), (c).  As this Court found before, in compliance          
with instructions from the First Circuit on remand, the                   
government was properly substituted as defendant in this matter,          
[T]he government has proffered sufficient documentation              
that Dr. Roca provided services to the decedent as required          
under his employment contract with LCHC . . . . [T]he                
government provide[d] documentary evidence that Dr. Roca             
was required by his employment contract to participate in            
the departmental call schedule for LCHC patients . . . .             
Accordingly, the medical service Dr. Roca provided to                
[Allen] was within the scope of his employment . . . .               

O’Brien v. Roca, No. CV 21-10621-NMG, 2024 WL 899153, at *2-*3            
(D. Mass. Mar. 1, 2024).                                                  
     2.  Plaintiff’s Opposition to Reinstatement                     
Plaintiff’s arguments in opposition to reinstatement of              
dismissal offer no compelling reason for the Court to alter its           
earlier decision.  As a threshold matter, none of the three               
holdings plaintiff attempts to relitigate was abrogated on                
appeal.  Instead, the First Circuit left undisturbed the Court’s          
decision in its 2021 order regarding the applicability of the             
two-year statute of limitations in the FTCA and the                       
inapplicability of the savings provision in the Westfall Act.             
See O’Brien, 56 F.4th at 145 (recognizing that this Court’s               
prior decision “found the plaintiff’s claims to be time-barred”           

without further comment).  The First Circuit remanded for the             
sole purpose of having the Court determine whether the                    
government was properly substituted as a defendant. See id. at            
141, 152.  This Court has now concluded that the government was           
properly substituted and that decision has not been addressed in          
any intervening appeal.  See O’Brien v. Roca, 2024 WL 899153, at          
*2-*3; cf. Ellis, 313 F.3d at 646 (indicating that law of case            
doctrine does not apply if legal conclusion is later “corrected           
by an appellate tribunal”).                                               
Furthermore, plaintiff asserts only two changes of                   
circumstance that have arisen since this Court’s prior order of           
dismissal, neither of which warrant the Court’s reconsideration           

thereof. Cf. Vigneau, 337 F.3d at 67–68 (stating exceptions to            
law of case doctrine).  First, plaintiff claims that, since the           
Court’s prior order, he has presented his claim to an                     
appropriate federal agency.  As previously determined and                 
reiterated above, however, plaintiff filed his suit more than             
two years after the underlying injury accrued.  As such, the              
presentment of his claim to an administrative agency within 60            
days of dismissal would not have been “timely” even if it had             
been presented on the date that this civil action was filed.              
See 28 U.S.C. § 2679(d)(5)(A).                                            
Plaintiff also argues in his motion for reconsideration              
that the question of whether the government was properly                  

substituted as a defendant in place of Dr. Roca must now be               
revisited in light of the Supreme Court’s intervening decision            
in Loper, which overturned Chevron deference on which this Court          
relied in its prior order.  See O’Brien, 2024 WL 899153, at *3            
(citing Chevron, U.S.A. Inc. v. Nat’l Res. Def. Council Inc.,             
467 U.S. 837, 104 (1984)).  Although an “intervening change in            
controlling law” can be grounds for reconsideration, it is                
incumbent upon the moving party to show not only a change in the          
law but also that such change “warrants modification of the               
judgment.”  In re Genzyme Corp. Sec. Litig., 754 F.3d at 46               
(citing Fed. R. Civ. P. 59).                                              
Here, plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that the demise            

of the so-called Chevron deference would alter this Court’s               
prior judgment in any way. Under the previous Chevron framework,          
courts granted “controlling weight” to an agency’s statutory              
interpretation of a statute if the Court found that statute               
ambiguous.  Flock v. U.S. Dep’t of Transp., 840 F.3d 49, 54 (1st          
Cir. 2016) (quoting Chevron, 467 U.S. at 843-44).  As plaintiff           
correctly identifies, under the new regime, that is no longer             
the case. See Loper, 144 S. Ct. at 2247 (“Chevron is                      
overruled.”).  Now, courts must “exercise their independent               
judgment in deciding whether an agency has acted within its               
statutory authority.”  Loper, 144 S. Ct. at 2273.                         
A single sentence in Loper intimates that its abrogation of          

Chevron “do[es] not call into question prior cases that relied            
on the Chevron framework.”  144 S. Ct. at 2273.  While the First          
Circuit has yet to interpret the meaning of this directive, the           
one circuit that has (the Sixth Circuit) relied on it to reject           
a post-Loper challenge to a prior decision that applied Chevron.          
See Tennessee v. Becerra, No. 24-5220, 2024 WL 3934560, at *7             
(6th Cir. Aug. 26, 2024) (“[W]hile Loper . . . opens the door to          
new challenges based on new agency actions interpreting                   
statutes, it forecloses new challenges based on specific agency           
actions that were already resolved via Chevron deference                  
analysis.”). Given the lack of guidance from the First Circuit,           
this Court declines to rest its decision solely on those                  

grounds.                                                                  
In light of the foregoing change in the law, however,                
plaintiff offers the Court no reason why the outcome of its               
prior decision, based on the specific statute and regulation at           
issue in this case, would differ after Loper.  This Court                 
asserted in its prior order that it was not required to proceed           
to Chevron step two, and that it was only under the second step           
of Chevron that courts defer to agencies. Chevron, 467 U.S. at            
842–43.  As described in Loper,                                           
Chevron . . . require[d] courts to use a two-step framework          
to interpret statutes administered by federal agencies . .           
. . [A] reviewing court . . . first assess[ed] whether               
Congress has directly spoken to the precise question at              
issue. If . . . congressional intent is “clear,” that is             
the end of the inquiry. But if the court determines that             
“the statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to the              
specific issue” at hand, the court must, at Chevron’s                
second step, defer to the agency’s interpretation if it              
[was] based on a permissible construction of the statute.            

Loper, 144 S. Ct. at 2254.  Loper only proscribes courts from             
deferring to an agency’s interpretation of a statute that is              
ambiguous.                                                                
Effectively, Loper overrules what had in common parlance             
been called “Chevron step two”: that courts should defer to an            
agency’s interpretation of ambiguous statutes. See Gordon v.              
Johnson, 991 F. Supp. 2d 258, 267 (D. Mass. 2013), aff’d sub              
nom. Castaneda v. Souza, 810 F.3d 15 (1st Cir. 2015).  Loper              
does not, of course, prevent a court from interpreting a statute          
of its own accord, what had been called “Chevron step one.” See           
Gordon, 991 F. Supp. 2d at 263; accord Strickland v. Comm’r,              
Maine Dep’t of Hum. Servs., 48 F.3d 12, 16 (1st Cir. 1995) (“In           
performing the first part of a Chevron analysis, no deference is          
due. Instead, courts must look primarily to the plain meaning of          
the statute . . . as well as the language and design of the               
statute.” (quotations omitted)).  Because this Court reached its          
prior decision under the first step of Chevron, applying its own          
interpretation of the statute without reaching the deferential            
inquiry at step two, the Court concludes that the intervening             
Loper decision has no impact on the prior result. Cf. Loper, 144          
S. Ct. at 2273 (“[W]hen a . . . statute delegates authority to            

an agency consistent with constitutional limits, courts must              
respect the delegation.”).                                                
In the absence of any reason to reconsider its previous              
conclusion that 1) plaintiff’s claim is untimely under the FTCA,          
2) the savings provision of the Westfall Act does not save his            
claim, and 3) the government was properly substituted as a                
defendant, the Court is compelled to reaffirm its previous                
findings.  See In re New Eng. Compounding Pharmacy, Inc., Prod.           
Liab. Litig., No. CIV.A. 13-02419-RWZ, 2014 WL 2040139, at *7             
(D. Mass. May 15, 2014) (declining to reconsider issue because            
“[t]he court ha[d] already decided the issue” and therefore               
“that decision stands as the law of the case”); see also                  

Figueroa v. United States, No. CRIM. 06-40007-FDS, 2013 WL                
4010550, at *6 (D. Mass. Aug. 2, 2013) (denying motion to                 
reconsider after finding “no reason to alter” prior order).               
Dismissal is warranted now for the same reasons that it was               
warranted in 2021.  See O’Brien, 2024 WL 899153, at *3                    
(accepting substitution of defendant); O’Brien, 2021 WL 5111857,          
at *3 (granting motion to dismiss).  Any other decision would             
amount to an impermissible relitigation of issues already                 
decided.  See Vigneau, 337 F.3d at 67–68 (expressing desire to            
avoid “relitigation”).                                                    

                         ORDER                                       

For the foregoing reasons, the motion of defendant, the              
United States, to reinstate this Court’s previous order of                
dismissal is ALLOWED, and the motion of plaintiff, Brad O’Brien,          
to reconsider this Court’s previous decision to allow the                 
government to substitute itself as defendant is DENIED.                   
So ordered.                                                               

                              _/s/ Nathaniel M. Gorton               
                              Nathaniel M. Gorton                    
                              United States District Judge           

Dated:  September 6, 2024

---

United States District Court                            
                   District of Massachusetts                             

                                   )                                     
BRAD O’BRIEN, as personal           )                                     
representative of the Estate of     )                                     
Melissa Allen,                      )                                     
                                   )                                     
         Plaintiff,                )    Civil Action No.                 
                                   )    21-10621-NMG                     
         v.                        )                                     
                                   )                                     
FERNANDO ROCA, M.D. et al.,         )                                     
                                   )                                     
         Defendants.               ))                                    

                      MEMORANDUM & ORDER                                 
GORTON, J.                                                                
    This action arises out of the death of Melissa Allen                 
(“Allen” or “the decedent”) in August, 2016, after she was                
treated by Dr. Fernando Roca, (“Dr. Roca”), in July, 2016, at             
Lowell General Hospital (“the Hospital”) in Massachusetts.                
Pending before the Court is the government’s motion to                    
substitute itself for defendant Dr. Roca and the cross motion of          
Brad O’Brien, the representative of the estate of the decedent            
(“plaintiff”), to remand the case to state court.  For the                
reasons that follow, the motion to substitute will be allowed             
and the motion to remand will be denied.                                  
I.   Factual and Procedural Background                                    
    In July, 2016, Allen was admitted to the Hospital after              
suffering multiple seizures at her home.  Although Allen was              
unaware of the fact, she was found to be pregnant and was                 
treated at the Hospital by the attending obstetrician, Dr. Roca.          
After delivering a child, Allen was transported to Tufts Medical          

Center in Boston, where she died 11 days later from medical               
complications related to her pregnancy.                                   
    In June, 2019, plaintiff filed suit in the Massachusetts             
Superior Court for Middlesex County against Dr. Roca and several          
other Hospital employees alleging, inter alia, negligence in              
their treatment of Allen.  In April, 2021, the government                 
removed that action to this Court pursuant to 42 U.S.C.                   
§ 233(c), and, on the same day, noticed the substitution of               
itself for Dr. Roca.  Shortly thereafter, the government moved            
to dismiss counts one through eight of the complaint for lack of          
subject matter jurisdiction and for failure to state a claim.             

    In November, 2021, this Court allowed the government’s               
motion to dismiss.  This Court held that under the Westfall Act,          
28 U.S.C. § 2679(d), the United States was properly substituted           
for Dr. Roca and that, accordingly, plaintiff’s claims were               
time-barred.                                                              
    Plaintiff appealed the decision to the First Circuit Court           
of Appeals (“First Circuit”) in January, 2022.  On appeal, the            
government disavowed its prior reliance on the Westfall Act and           
urged the First Circuit to affirm on a new basis, that                    
substitution was proper under the Public Health Service Act               
(“PHSA”), 42 U.S.C. § 233.  The First Circuit subsequently held           
that there was an insufficient evidentiary record to determine            
whether the government’s new basis for substitution was proper,           

and vacated and remanded the case.  O’Brien v. United States, 56          
F.4th 139 (1st Cir. 2022).                                                
II.   Motion to Substitute                                                 

       A. Statutory and Regulatory Background                             
     The propriety of substitution hinges on whether Dr. Roca             
has been properly deemed an employee of the Public Health                 
Service (“PHS”) for the medical service he provided to the                
decedent under 42 U.S.C. § 233(g) and related regulations.                
     PHSA protects PHS employees from personal liability for              
injuries resulting from the performance of medical services               
rendered in the scope of their employment. 42 U.S.C. § 233(a).            
For an action against a PHS employee filed in state court, PHSA           

requires removal to federal court upon the Attorney General’s             
certification that the PHS employee acted within the scope of             
his or her employment. 42 U.S.C. § 233(c).  Once in federal               
court, the government is substituted as the defendant and an              
action under the Federal Tort Claim Act, 28 U.S.C. § 1346,                
(“FTCA”) becomes the exclusive remedy.  42 U.S.C. § 233(a), (c).          
    Under the Federally Supported Health Centers Assistance Act          
of 1995 (“FSHCAA”), employees of health centers that receive              
federal funds pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 254b may avail themselves           
of the same liability protection as PHS employees.  42 U.S.C. §           

233(g)(1)(A).  A health center must submit an application to the          
Secretary of Health and Human Services for its employees to be            
“deem[ed]” PHS employees.  42 U.S.C. § 233(g)(1)(D).                      
    Plaintiff does not dispute that Dr. Roca was an employee of          
Lowell Community Health Center (“LCHC”).  Nor does he dispute             
the evidence proffered by the government that LCHC receives               
federal funds pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 254b and, as an entity,             
has been deemed eligible for liability protection by the                  
Secretary of Health and Human Services since 2016.                        
    The Secretary’s deeming determination does not, however,             
conclusively establish liability protection for services                  

rendered by health center employees to individuals who are not            
patients of the health center, such as the decedent here. See 42          
U.S.C. § 233(g)(1)(B)-(C).                                                
    Services provided to individuals who are not health center           
patients are subject to liability protection only if, as                  
relevant here,                                                            
    the Secretary determines, after reviewing an                         
    application submitted [by a deemed health center]                    
    under subparagraph (D), that the provision of the                    
    services to such individuals—                                        
    ...                                                                  
    (iii) [is] otherwise required under an employment                    
    contract (or similar arrangement) between the entity                 
    and an officer, governing board member, employee, or                 
    contractor of the entity.                                            
42 U.S.C. § 233(g)(1)(C).                                                 
    Finally, the Secretary has provided by regulation that               
certain services provided to non-health center patients                   
automatically qualify for liability protection without the                
requirement that a health center submit a separate application            
for additional coverage.  See 42 C.F.R. § 6.6(e)(4).  The                 
government contends that Dr. Roca’s treatment of the decedent             
qualified for automatic liability protection under                        
§ 6.6(e)(4)(ii) which applies to                                          
    [p]eriodic hospital call or hospital emergency room                  
    coverage [that] is required by the hospital as a                     
    condition for obtaining hospital admitting privileges.               
    There must also be documentation for the particular                  
    health care provider that this coverage is a condition               
    of employment at the health center.                                  
42 C.F.R. § 6.6(e)(4)(ii).                                                
      B. Dr. Roca Was Properly Deemed an Employee of the PHS             
    Whether Dr. Roca was properly deemed an employee of                  
the PHS eligible for liability protection depends upon                    
whether the government has proffered sufficient                           
documentation that Dr. Roca provided services to the                      
decedent as required under his employment contract with                   
LCHC. See 42 U.S.C. § 233(g)(C)(iii); see also 42 C.F.R. §                
6.6(e)(4)(ii).                                                            
    Under § 6.6(e)(4)(ii) of the regulation, the government              
must provide evidence that 1) Lowell General Hospital (“LGH”)             
required Dr. Roca to treat non-health center patients on-call in          

order to obtain hospital admitting privileges and 2) on-call              
coverage at LGH is a condition of Dr. Roca’s employment at LCHC.          
    The parties primarily dispute whether or not the on-call             
coverage that Dr. Roca provided at LGH constituted a condition            
of his employment at LCHC.                                                
    First, the government provides documentary evidence that             
Dr. Roca was required by his employment contract to participate           
in the departmental call schedule for LCHC patients.  Such                
participation includes                                                    
    addressing all [LCHC] patient care responsibilities                  
    when such patients seek services either by the                       
    telephone or when they present at Lowell General                     
    Hospital.                                                            
That provision establishes that Dr. Roca was required, in some            
circumstances, to serve LCHC patients at LGH.                             
    The government also proffers evidence of the LGH rules and           
regulations, one of which requires that, if Dr. Roca is to admit          
and provide care for LCHC patients at LGH, he has to be on the            
LGH staff.  Furthermore, the government contends that, based              
upon the LGH rules and regulations and an affidavit of Dr. Roca,          
in order for Dr. Roca to be on the LGH staff, he was required to          
provide on-call services for unassigned OB-GYN patients at LGH,           
including individuals who are not LCHC patients.  Accordingly,            
Dr. Roca’s employment contract with LCHC required that he                 
provide on-call coverage at LGH.                                          

    Plaintiff asserts that no express provision of the LCHC              
employment contract requires Dr. Roca to provide on-call                  
coverage at LGH but the contractual requirement that Dr. Roca             
serve LCHC patients at LGH compels the conclusion that providing          
on-call services at LGH is a condition of his employment.  For            
purpose of the regulation, that is sufficient.                            
    Plaintiff also rejoins that the LGH rules did not require            
Dr. Roca to provide on-call services based on several exceptions          
in those rules but that rejoinder is unpersuasive.  Plaintiff             
proffers no evidence suggesting that Dr. Roca would have                  
qualified for any exception.  The government, by contrast, has            

met its evidentiary burden for establishing that Dr. Roca was             
required to be on call at LGH by virtue of provisions contained           
in his LCHC employment contract.  Furthermore, Dr. Roca’s                 
averment that he received no compensation “other than the                 
regular compensation received from [LCHC]” for the services he            
provided to the decedent indicates that he was on-call at LGH to          
serve his employer, LCHC.                                                 
    Dr. Roca was required to treat on-call patients at LGH as            
part of his employment with LCHC.  Providing such coverage was            
also a condition of obtaining admission privileges at LGH.                
Accordingly, the medical service Dr. Roca provided to decedent            
was within the scope of his employment and for the purpose of             
those services, he was deemed an employee of the PHS. See 42              

C.F.R. § 6.6(e)(ii).                                                      
      C. Challenge to 42 C.F.R. § 6.6(e)(4)                              
    Plaintiff challenges the foundation of Dr. Roca’s liability          
coverage by asserting that the U.S. Department of Health and              
Human Services impermissibly interpreted FSHCAA when it                   
promulgated 42 C.F.R. § 6.6(e)(4).  It contends that 42 C.F.R.            
§ 6.6(e)(4) abrogates the statute’s unambiguous command that the          
Secretary review a deeming application with the requisite                 
“detailed information [and] supporting documentation” and make a          
factual determination that the applicant meets the requirements           
listed in subparagraphs (B) and (C) of the statute.                       

    To assess whether the Secretary of Health and Human                  
Services permissibly interpreted FSHCAA when it promulgated the           
regulation, the Court applies the Chevron framework. See                  
Chevron, U.S.A. Inc. v. Nat’l Res. Def. Council Inc., 467 U.S.            
837 (1984).  First, this Court must determine whether “Congress           
has directly spoken to the precise question at issue.”                    
Massachusetts v. Sebelius, 638 F.3d 24, 30 (1st Cir. 2011)                
(quoting Chevron, 467 U.S. at 842).  If the intent of Congress            
is unambiguous, the Court will apply the plain meaning of the             
law using familiar textual principles. Id.  If, however,                  
Congress has not spoken unambiguously to the precise issue, the           
agency interpretation will be “given controlling weight unless            
[it is] arbitrary, capricious, or manifestly contrary to the              

statute.” Flock v. U.S. Dep’t of Transp., 840 F.3d 49, 54 (1st            
Cir. 2016) (quoting Chevron, 467 U.S. at 843-44).1                        
    The statutory scheme does not unambiguously preclude the             
regulation.  The plain text of the statute requires, at a                 
minimum, only a single deeming application.  Under subparagraph           
(D), the Secretary                                                        
    may not under subparagraph (A) deem an entity...and                  
    may not apply such deeming to services described in                  
    subparagraph (B)(ii) unless the entity has submitted                 
    an application for such deeming to the Secretary.                    
42 U.S.C. § 233(g)(1)(D) (emphases added).  The statute makes a           
linguistic distinction between “deem[ing] an entity” under                
subparagraph (A) and “apply[ing] such deeming to services                 
described in subparagraph (B)(ii)”, i.e., services rendered to            
non-patients of a health center. Id.  A healthcare provider is            
required to submit (and LGH has submitted) an application to be           

1 The Court is aware that the United States Supreme Court is actively     
considering the propriety of the Chevron doctrine. See Loper Bright       
Enterprises v. Raimondo, 45 F.4th 359 (D.C. Cir. 2022), cert. granted, 143 S. 
Ct. 2429 (2023).  The outcome of that case does not, however, ultimately bear 
upon this Court’s decision.                                               
“deem[ed] an entity” pursuant to subparagraph (A).  But that              
deeming determination needs to be further “appl[ied]” to extend           
to the non-patient services described in subparagraph (C). Id.            
    The statute expressly requires that an entity submit “an             
application for such deeming” as a prerequisite of both “deeming          
an entity” and “appl[ying]” the deeming determination to non-             

patient services. Id. (emphasis added).  The statute refers to            
the term “application” in the singular, indicating that at                
least, but not necessarily more than, one application is                  
required.  Equally pertinent, the statute requires an                     
application for “such deeming.”  The phrase “such deeming” by             
itself refers to an initial deeming determination pursuant to             
subparagraph (A), not the “appl[ication of] such deeming” to the          
non-patient services described in subparagraph (C).                       
    The statute unambiguously requires that an entity submit an          
initial deeming application.  It is silent, however, as to                
whether entities are required to submit additional applications           

for an initial deeming determination to be “appl[ied]” to the             
non-patient services described in subparagraph (C).  The statute          
does, however, expressly reserve setting forth the “form                  
and...manner” of applications to agency discretion. Id.                   
    The regulation appropriately fills the interstice left by            
the statute. See SEC v. Chenery Corp., 332 U.S. 194, 202 (1947)           
(“The function of filling in the interstices of the Act should            
be performed...through this quasi-legislative promulgation of             
rules to be applied in the future”).  In 42 C.F.R. § 6.6(e)(4),           
the Secretary has delineated several specific circumstances in            
which the initial deeming application suffices to make a                  
coverage determination. See, e.g., 42 C.F.R. § 6.6(e)(4)(i)(A)            
(describing non-patient services provided pursuant to a                   

community health center affiliation with a school).                       
    If the scenario at issue does not “fit[] squarely” within            
the description of one the scenarios listed in the regulation,            
the regulation instructs that “the health center should seek a            
particularized determination of coverage.” Id. at § 6.6(e)(4).            
In other words, for situations that do not fit precisely within           
the facts of the examples listed in the regulation, the                   
Secretary has determined that the initial deeming application             
does not contain sufficient information to make a coverage                
determination and therefore another application is needed.                
    Plaintiff contends that even if the statute requires only a          

single application, the regulation abrogates statutory text by            
waiving the requirement that the application “contain detailed            
information” to ensure that the requirements of subparagraphs             
(B) and (C) are met.  In plaintiff’s view, it is impossible to            
ascertain whether such requirements are met based on just the             
initial deeming application and yet the regulation permits just           
that.                                                                     
    Plaintiff fails, however, to consider that the statute               
expressly left the Secretary with discretion to decide which              
“detailed information” is needed to ascertain whether the                 
requirements of subparagraphs (B) and (C) are met.  With respect          
to the examples listed in the regulation, the Secretary has               
found that the information contained in an initial deeming                

application sufficiently enables a determination.                         
    As relevant here, the Secretary has rationally ascertained           
that care provided to non-patients                                        
    [during] periodic hospital call...[a]s required by the               
    hospital...[and a]s a condition of employment at the                 
    health center                                                        
always meets the requirements of subparagraphs (B) and (C). See           
42 C.F.R. § 6.6(e)(4)(ii).  The situation described in the                
regulation fits squarely within the broader pronouncement of the          
statute that coverage extends to any non-patient services that            
are “otherwise required under an employment contract... between           
the entity and an... employee.” 42 U.S.C. 233(g)(1)(C)(iii).              
Thus, for the scenario described in the regulation, additional            
information in a separate deeming application is not relevant to          
the Secretary’s coverage decision.                                        
    It is clear that the statute does not unambiguously                  
foreclose the Secretary’s interpretation.  The Court is                   
satisfied that the statute demonstrates Congressional intent to           
vest the Secretary with the discretion to determine the                   
information it required as part of the application process.               
While this Court is not required to proceed to Chevron step two,          
it also concludes, that the regulation reflects a reasonable              
interpretation of the statute. See Lovgren v. Locke, 701 F.3d 5,          
31 (1st Cir. 2012) (citing Mayo Found. For Med. Educ. & Research          
v. United States, 562 U.S. 44, 59 (2011)).                                

    As described above, it was a reasonable textual                      
interpretation for the Secretary to conclude that non-patient             
services “required under an employment contract” include                  
“[p]eriodic hospital call...[a]s required” by both the health             
center as a condition of employment and the hospital.  The                
greater includes the lesser.                                              
    Furthermore, as the government contends, it is burdensome            
for health centers to seek particularized coverage                        
determinations, especially in common scenarios where health               
center doctors treat non-patients of health centers.  Thus, the           
Secretary presumably deduced that eliminating paperwork in clear          

cases comports with the intent of FSHCAA, which seeks to                  
alleviate certain financial burdens placed on historically                
under-resourced community health centers. See Wilson v. Big               
Sandy Healthcare, Inc., 553 F. Supp. 2d 825, 830 (E.D. Ky.                
2008).                                                                    
    Accordingly, the agency’s interpretation will be upheld and          
the motion to substitute will be allowed.                                 
                             ORDER                                       
    For the foregoing reasons,                                           

 1) the motion of defendant, United States of America, to                
    substitute itself for defendant Fernando Roca, M.D. (Docket          
    No. 45), is ALLOWED, and                                             
 2) the cross-motion of plaintiff, Brad O’Brien, personal                
    representative of the Estate of Melissa Allen (Docket No.            

    50), to remand the case to state court, is DENIED.                   
So ordered.                                                               

                                  _/s/ Nathaniel M. Gorton _             
                                  Nathaniel M. Gorton                    
                                  United States District Judge           

Dated:  March 1, 2024

---

United States District Court                           
               District of Massachusetts                             

                               )                                     
Brad O’Brien, Personal              )                                     
Representative of the Estate of     )                                     
Melissa Allen,                      )                                     
                               )                                     
     Plaintiff,                )                                     
                               )    Civil Action No.                 
     v.                        )    21-10621-NMG                     
                               )                                     
Lowell General Hospital, et al.,    )                                     
                               )                                     
     Defendants.               )                                     
                               )                                     

                  MEMORANDUM & ORDER                                 
Gorton, J.                                                                
This wrongful death action arises out of treatment received          
by Melissa Allen (“Allen” or “the decedent”) from Fernando Roca,          
M.D. (“Dr. Roca”), in July, 2016, at Lowell General Hospital              
(“the Hospital”).  Just under three years later, plaintiff Brad           
O’Brien (“O’Brien” or “plaintiff”) sued Dr. Roca, Lowell General          
Hospital (“the Hospital”) and other medical staff in                      
Massachusetts state court.                                                
In April, 2021, defendants removed the action to federal             
court and noticed the substitution of the government for Dr.              
Roca pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2679(d).  The government’s motion            
to dismiss the claims against it was allowed in November, 2021.           
For purposes of appeal, plaintiff then moved for a separate and           
final judgment on the claims against the government pursuant to           
Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(b) which the Court allowed by margin                   
endorsement.  The First Circuit Court of Appeals (“the First              
Circuit”) has remanded the case for a statement of reasons for            

entry of judgment which this Court now provides.                          
When an action includes multiple claims or parties, Rule             
54(b) permits the Court to enter a final judgment as to fewer             
than all claims or parties only if it determines that there is            
“no just reason for delay.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(b).  In making             
such a determination, the Court examines                                  
any interrelationship or overlap among the various legal             
and factual issues involved [and] any equities and                   
efficiencies implicated by the requested piecemeal review.           
State Street Bank & Trust Co. v. Brockrim, Inc., 87 F.3d 1487,            
1489 (1st Cir. 1996).  The First Circuit has stated that Rule             
54(b) certification should be used sparingly. Nystedt v. Nigro,           
700 F.3d 25, 29 (1st Cir. 2012).                                          
The November, 2021, judgment is final because it disposed            
completely of all claims against the government. Maldonado-Denis          
v. Castillo-Rodriguez, 23 F.3d 576, 580 (1st Cir. 1994).  The             
Court also concludes that there is no just reason for delay               
under the circumstances of this case.  The dismissal of the               
claims against the government is based upon two holdings: first,          
that Dr. Roca was acting within the scope of his federal                  
employment, regardless of whether he may also have been a                 
“borrowed servant” of the Hospital, making substitution of the            
government proper under 28 U.S.C. § 2679(d), and second, that             
the claims against the government were untimely under the                 
Federal Tort Claims Act.  The allegations against the remaining           

defendants (who are not federal employees) are distinct from the          
narrow legal issues upon which the Court relied to dismiss the            
claims against the government.  The Court is sensitive to the             
“prudential policy against the scattershot disposition of                 
litigation” but concludes that this case warrants entry of                
separate and final judgment as to the government. Spiegel v.              
Trustees of Tufts College, 843 F.2d 38, 42 (1st Cir. 1988).               
                         ORDER                                       
In compliance with the Order of the First Circuit Court of           
Appeals dated March 16, 2022, (Docket No. 24) the foregoing               
statement of reasons is hereby entered in support of the Court’s          
Separate and Final Judgment entered February 9, 2022.                     

So ordered.                                                               


                              _/s/ Nathaniel M. Gorton_ __           
                              Nathaniel M. Gorton                    
                              United States District Judge           

Dated March 23, 2022

---

United States District Court                            
                   District of Massachusetts                             

                                   )                                     
Brad O’Brien, Personal              )                                     
Representative of the Estate of     )                                     
Melissa Allen,                      )                                     
                                   )                                     
         Plaintiff,                )                                     
                                   )    Civil Action No.                 
         v.                        )    21-10621-NMG                     
                                   )                                     
Lowell General Hospital, et al.,    )                                     
                                   )                                     
         Defendants.               )                                     
                                   )                                     


                      MEMORANDUM & ORDER                                 
Gorton, J.                                                                
    This action arises out of the death of Melissa Allen                 
(“Allen” or “the decedent”) in August, 2016, after having                 
received treatment from Fernando Roca, M.D. (“Dr. Roca”), in              
July, 2016, at Lowell General Hospital (“the Hospital”).                  
Pending before the Court is the motion of defendant the United            
States to dismiss the complaint filed by plaintiff Brad O’Brien,          
the personal representative of the estate of the decedent (“the           
plaintiff”).  For the reasons that follow, that motion will be            
allowed.                                                                  
I.   Background                                                           
    On July, 26, 2016, Allen was admitted to the Hospital after          
suffering multiple seizures at her home.  Although Ms. Allen was          
unaware of the fact, she was found to be pregnant and was                 
treated at the Hospital by the attending obstetrician, Dr. Roca.          
After delivering a child, Allen was transported to Tufts Medical          
Center in Boston, where she died 11 days later, on August 6,              
2016, as a result of medical complications related to her                 
pregnancy.                                                                

     On June 20, 2019, the plaintiff filed suit in the                    
Massachusetts Superior Court for Middlesex County against Dr.             
Roca and several other Hospital employees alleging, inter alia,           
negligence in their treatment of Allen.  On April 14, 2021, the           
government removed that action to this Court pursuant to 42               
U.S.C. § 233(c), and, on the same day, noticed the substitution           

of itself for Dr. Roca.  Shortly thereafter, it moved to dismiss          
counts one through eight of the complaint for lack of subject             
matter jurisdiction and for failure to state a claim.                     
II.   Motion to Dismiss                                                    

       A. Legal Standard                                                  
     In opposing a motion to dismiss for lack of subject matter           
jurisdiction under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(1), the plaintiff bears          
the burden of establishing that the Court has jurisdiction.               
Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 561 (1992).                 
Jurisdiction to sue the United States must be found in an                 
express Congressional waiver of immunity or consent to be sued,           
and, in general, statutes waiving sovereign immunity should be            
strictly construed. Murphy v. United States, 45 F.3d 520, 522             
(1st Cir. 1995), see United States v. White Mountain Apache               
Tribe, 573 U.S. 465, 472 (2003).  Unless a suit against the               
government falls within the terms of a waiver, jurisdiction               

cannot be maintained. White Mountain, 537 U.S. at 472.  For the           
purpose of determining its jurisdiction, a court may look to              
supplemental materials in addition to pleadings. McIntyre v.              
United States, 367 F.3d 38, 42 (1st Cir. 2004).                           
    To survive a motion to dismiss under Fed. R. Civ. P.                 
12(b)(6), the subject pleading must contain sufficient factual            

matter to state a claim for relief that is actionable as a                
matter of law and “plausible on its face.” Ashcroft v. Iqbal,             
556 U.S. 662, 678 (2009) (quoting Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly,             
550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007)).  A claim is facially plausible if,             
after accepting as true all non-conclusory factual allegations,           
the court can draw the reasonable inference that the defendant            
is liable for the misconduct alleged. Ocasio-Hernandez v.                 
Fortuno-Burset, 640 F.3d 1, 12 (1st Cir. 2011).                           

    When rendering that determination, a court may not look              
beyond the facts alleged in the complaint, documents                      
incorporated by reference therein and facts susceptible to                
judicial notice. Haley v. City of Boston, 657 F.3d 39, 46 (1st            
Cir. 2011).  A court also may not disregard properly pled                 
factual allegations even if actual proof of those facts is                
improbable. Ocasio-Hernandez, 640 F.3d at 12.  Rather, the                
relevant inquiry focuses on the reasonableness of the inference           
of liability that the plaintiff is asking the court to draw.              

Id. at 13.                                                                
      B. Application                                                     

    The government contends that the plaintiff’s claims against          
it do not fall within the limited waiver of sovereign immunity            
effected by the Federal Tort Claims Act, 28 U.S.C. §§ 1346(b),            
2671-80 (“the FTCA”), and therefore this Court lacks subject              
matter jurisdiction over them.  Further, the government submits           
that, because the statute of limitations on the plaintiff’s               
claims has run, his complaint fails to state a claim upon which           
relief can be granted.                                                    

    The plaintiff rejoins that at the time of the actions                
giving rise to the suit, Dr. Roca was not a federal employee but          
rather a “borrowed servant” of a private, non-governmental                
entity, namely the Hospital.  Because Dr. Roca was not a                  
governmental employee, plaintiff argues, he need not seek relief          
under the FTCA and the sovereign immunity of the United States            
is no obstacle to his claims.1  In the alternative, the plaintiff         
asserts that if Dr. Roca is deemed to have been a federal                 
employee at the relevant time, the facts as pled warrant the              
equitable tolling of the statute of limitations.  Finally,                
plaintiff contends that the interests of judicial economy                 
disfavor dismissal because the savings provision of 28 U.S.C. §           

2679(d)(5) would allow the plaintiff to pursue his claim even if          
the present action were dismissed.                                        
    The Court will first address the plaintiff’s contention              
that the government was not properly substituted for Dr. Roca             
and then his arguments with respect to equitable tolling and the          
savings provision of § 2679(d)(5).                                        

         i.   The Substitution of the United States for Dr.              
              Roca as Party Defendant Under 28 U.S.C. §                  
              2679(d)(1)                                                 

    The plaintiff asserts that the substitution under 28 U.S.C.          
§ 2679(d)(1) of the United States for Dr. Roca as party                   
defendant was improper because Dr. Roca was acting as a borrowed          
servant, not a federal employee, at the time of the alleged               


1 Plaintiff does not purport to maintain a suit against the               
United States.  Rather, he seeks to recover against Dr. Roca,             
which would require the re-substitution of Dr. Roca as                    
defendant. See Gutierez de Martinez v. Lamagno, 515 U.S. 417,             
434-35 (1995).                                                            
malpractice.  The government maintains that Dr. Roca was acting           
within the scope of his federal employment.                               

    Although the § 2679(d)(1) substitution determination is              
made in the first instance by the Attorney General, it is                 
“provisional and subject to judicial review.” Gutierrez de                
Martinez, 515 U.S. at 434.  A plaintiff who disputes the                  
Attorney General’s certification bears the burden of proof.               
Davric Me. Corp. v. United States Postal Serv., 238 F.3d 58, 66           
(1st Cir. 2001).                                                          

    Substitution of the United States for an employee of the             
government is proper if that employee was acting within the               
scope of his office or employment at the time of the incident             
out of which the claim arose. 28 U.S.C. § 2679(c),(d).  Whether           
an employee was acting “within the scope of his office or                 
employment” is determined by reference to state law. Davric, 238          
F.3d at 65.  Massachusetts law provides that an act is within             
the scope of one’s employment if 1) it is of the kind he is               
employed to perform, 2) occurs substantially within the                   

authorized time and space limits and 3) is motivated at least in          
part by a purpose to serve the employer. Kelly v. United States,          
924 F.2d 355, 357 (1st Cir. 1991) (quoting Wang Laboratories,             
Inc. v. Business Incentives, Inc., 501 N.E.2d 1163, 1166 (Mass.           
1986)).  The scope of employment test determines, in substance,           
whether an act is “the kind of thing that in a general way                
employees of this kind do in employment of this kind.”                    
Burroughs v. Commonwealth, 673 N.E.2d 1217, 1219 (Mass. 1996).            
The test does not construe the scope of employment                        
restrictively. Commonwealth v. Jerez, 457 N.E.2d 1105, 1108               
(Mass. 1983).                                                             

    Dr. Roca acted within the scope of his federal employment            
at the time of the events giving rise to the instant claim.  As           
a condition of his contract with his employer, Lowell Community           
Health Center (“the Health Center”), a federally funded                   
facility, Dr. Roca was required to maintain privileges at the             
Hospital and to provide care in emergency situations, i.e. to             

provide the care at issue here.  His actions were taken pursuant          
to his contractual obligations and were meant to serve his                
employer.  Therefore, Dr. Roca’s treatment of decedent was an             
act within the scope of his employment by the Health Center and           
the United States was properly substituted as the party                   
defendant.                                                                

    The plaintiff fails to allege facts that would conjure a             
contrary conclusion.  Rather, he contends that when treating the          
decedent Dr. Roca was acting as a borrowed servant and not as a           
federal employee, thus suggesting that the substitution of the            
United States for Dr. Roca under § 2679(d)(1) was improper.               
    The plaintiff’s argument misses the mark.  Whether an                
employee is a “borrowed servant” matters only insofar as it may           
indicate that he was or was not acting within the scope of his            
federal employment. See 28 U.S.C. § 2679(d)(1).  It does not              
resolve or determine the substitution issue. See id.  The                 
Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court has suggested, albeit in             

dicta, that actions of a borrowed servant are not necessarily             
beyond the scope of the servant’s employment, see Hohenleiter v.          
Quorum Health Res., 758 N.E.2d 616, 625 n.8 (Mass. 2001) (citing          
Restatement (Second) of Agency § 226 (1958)), and the lenient             
test for whether an act was performed within the scope of                 
employment reinforces that understanding, see Kelly, 924 F.2d at          
357.                                                                      

    Although not germane to Massachusetts agency law, the                
federal courts of appeals that have addressed borrowed servants           
in the context of § 2679(d)(1) have also rejected the notion              
that borrowed servants may not act within the scope of their              
federal employment for purposes of that statute. See Sutton v.            
Dorman, 176 Fed. App’x 580, 582 (5th Cir. 2006) (holding that             
under Texas law, a physician could be a borrowed servant yet              
still act within the scope of his federal employment) (citing             
Palmer v. Flaggman, 83 F.3d 196, 204-05 (5th Cir. 1996));                 
Carpenter v. Laxton, 1996 WL 499099 at *3 (6th Cir. Sept. 3,              
1996) (explaining that “the two concepts⎯scope of employment and          
borrowed servant⎯are not mutually exclusive”); Ward v. Gordon,            
999 F.2 1399, 1403 (9th Cir. 1993) (explaining that the district          

court erred when it concluded that defendant “necessarily                 
exceeded the scope of his employment with the government . . . .          
by acting as the [private] [h]ospital’s servant”).  Because               
neither § 2679 nor Massachusetts law precludes a borrowed                 
servant from acting within the scope of his or her federal                
employment, the Court finds it unnecessary to consider the                
plaintiff’s argument further.                                             

         ii.  Exhaustion and Timeliness                                  
    Federal law requires that a plaintiff who seeks to bring a           
tort claim against the United States first exhaust his or her             
administrative remedies. 28 U.S.C. § 2675(a).  Administrative             
exhaustion is a prerequisite to suit that cannot be waived.               

Gonzalez v. United States, 284 F.3d 281, 288 (1st Cir. 2002).             
Only upon denial of a claim by the appropriate administrative             
agency is that claim deemed exhausted and amenable to review by           
the federal courts. 28 U.S.C. § 2675(a).  Because the Court has           
concluded that, in this case, the United States was properly              
substituted for Dr. Roca, the plaintiff must administratively             
exhaust his claim against the government before he may engage it          
in federal court.                                                         
    Exhaustion of a tort claim against the federal government            
is subject to time limits specified by 28 U.S.C. § 2401(b).               
That statute requires such a tort claim to be presented to the            
appropriate federal agency within two years of its accrual. 28            
U.S.C. § 2401(b).  That, too, is a prerequisite to suit,                  
although the deadline for presentment to a federal agency may be          

equitably tolled. United States v. Kwai Fun Wong, 575 U.S. 402,           
412 (2015).                                                               
    Plaintiff does not dispute his failure to present a claim            
to any federal agency.  It is also undisputed that more than two          
years has elapsed since the date of the alleged injury, although          
the plaintiff argues that his claim only accrued later.                   

Plaintiff’s claims therefore will be dismissed.                           
    It remains for the Court to determine, however, whether to           
dismiss them on exhaustion or untimeliness grounds.  Faced with           
a similar choice in Sanchez v. United States, the First Circuit           
explained that “[l]ittle commends” the piecemeal approach that            
results from dismissal of an FTCA claim on exhaustion grounds,            

as a plaintiff with an unexhausted claim then must return to the          
agency (and, thereafter, to federal court) to litigate a                  
§ 2679(d)(5) timeliness issue. 740 F.3d 47, 50 (1st Cir. 2014).           
While the intervening decision of the Supreme Court in Kwai Fun           
Wong established that § 2401(b)’s time bar was not                        
jurisdictional, 575 U.S. at 420, this Court nevertheless                  
possesses leeway to choose among threshold grounds for denying            
audience to a case on the merits, Sinochem Intern. Co. Ltd. v.            
Malaysia Intern. Shipping Corp., 549 U.S. 422, 431, see also              
Sanchez, 740 F.3d at 51.  Accordingly, the Court will dismiss             
the plaintiff’s claims on timeliness grounds.                             

    If, after dismissal, the plaintiff were to present his               
claims to a federal agency, they would be untimely and                    
§ 2679(d)(5) would not save them from the two-year statute of             
limitations in § 2401(b).  Section 2679(d)(5) provides that when          
a claim against the United States is dismissed for failure to             
exhaust administrative remedies, and is subsequently presented            

to a federal agency, it will be deemed timely filed only if it            
would have been timely on the date the dismissed action was               
commenced. 28 U.S.C. § 2679(d)(5).  Here, the state court action          
was commenced on June 20, 2019, more than two years after the             
treatment provided to decedent by Dr. Roca.  An administrative            
action filed on that date would not have been timely, and thus            
§ 2679(d)(5) does not save the claims from the statute of                 
limitations set forth in § 2401(b).                                       

    Endeavoring to avoid the time bar of § 2401(b), the                  
plaintiff asserts that the claim did not accrue at the time of            
the alleged injury but rather at the date of his retention of             
counsel.  Because he did not retain counsel until September 6,            
2017, the plaintiff argues that his claim was timely for the              
purposes of §§ 2401(b) and 2679(d)(5).  The government disagrees          
and contends that a tort claim accrues at the time of injury              
where, as here, the factual basis was then known.                         

    Tort claims, as a general rule, accrue at the time of the            
plaintiff’s injury. Gonzalez, 284 F.3d at 288 (citing United              
States v. Kubrick, 444 U.S. 111, 122 (1979)).  Where the factual          
basis for a cause of action is “inherently unknowable”, however,          
the claim accrues when the plaintiff discovers it, or in the              
exercise of reasonable diligence should have. Id.  The factual            
basis of a cause of action is inherently unknowable if it is              

incapable of detection by the wronged party through the exercise          
of reasonable diligence. Id. at 289.  This exception is known as          
the “discovery rule”. Id. at 288.                                         
    The discovery rule does not apply to the injuries here at            
issue.  The Supreme Court has declined to extend the exception            
to injured parties who know 1) that they have been injured and            

2) who inflicted the injury. Kubrick, 444 U.S. at 122.  The               
plaintiff may not have been aware that he had a legal claim               
until he retained counsel in September, 2017, but that is not             
the question. See id. at 123 (stating that Congress did not               
intend that “accrual” of a claim “must await awareness by the             
plaintiff that his injury was negligently inflicted”).  Rather,           
the factual basis for the instant claim, i.e. the injury and the          
identity of Dr. Roca, were known to him by August, 2016, at the           
latest.                                                                   

    Finally, the Court addresses plaintiff’s request for                 
equitable tolling.  While the discovery rule governs when the             
limitations clock begins to run, equitable tolling halts its              
running. Rakes v. United States, 442 F.3d 7, 24 (1st Cir. 2006).          
Equitable tolling is available to a party who has pursued their           
rights diligently but through some extraordinary circumstance             
has been prevented from meeting a deadline. Kwai Fun Wong, 575            
U.S. at 408.  Here, the plaintiff contends that he is entitled            

to equitable tolling because he did not know, nor could have              
known, that Dr. Roca was a federal employee.                              
    The plaintiff’s argument is unavailing.  The First Circuit           
has held that reasonable diligence is a sine qua non for                  
obtaining equitable tolling, Sanchez, 740 F.3d at 55, and that            
plaintiffs’ counsel must inquire into whether any of the                  

possible defendants in a medical malpractice action such as this          
one were federal employees, id, Gonzalez at 291-92.  Counsel did          
not inquire but argues that his failure to do so should be                
excused because, unlike Gonzalez and Sanchez, the only treatment          
the decedent received from Dr. Roca was at the Hospital, a                
private entity, and not the federally-funded Health Center.  On           
the facts of this case, the Court finds the difference to be              
immaterial.  The First Circuit has held that an obligation to             
investigate exists even where the doctor may not appear at first          
blush to be a federal employee. Sanchez, 740 F.3d at 55.  As in           
Sanchez, no precedent allows for the dispensation requested. Id.          

at 57.                                                                    
                             ORDER                                       

    For the foregoing reasons, defendant’s motion to dismiss             
the complaint as to the United States (Docket No. 6) is ALLOWED.          
So ordered.                                                               


                                  _/s/ Nathaniel M. Gorton___            
                                  Nathaniel M. Gorton                    
                                  United States District Judge           

Dated November 3, 2021