UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                             
               FOR THE DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND                          

                               )                                         
LORNA ORABONA,                 )                                         
                               )                                         
     Plaintiff,                )                                         
                               )                                         
     v.                        )  C.A. No. 1:23-CV-00299-MSM-PAS         
                               )                                         
SANTANDER BANK, N.A.,          )                                         
                               )                                         
     Defendant.                )                                         
                               )                                         

                   MEMORANDUM AND ORDER                                  

Mary S. McElroy, United States District Judge.                            

    Before the Court is  the defendant, Santander Bank, N.A.’s (“Santander”), 
Motion to Dismiss the plaintiff, Lorna Orabona’s, First Amended Complaint pursuant 
to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6), or grant summary judgment in its favor, pursuant to Fed. 
R. Civ. P. 56, on the grounds that Ms. Orabona’s claims in this employment dispute 
are preempted by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”), 
29 U.S.C. § 1001  .  (ECF No. 22.)  In addition, Ms. Orabona has filed a Motion 
to Strike an exhibit from Santander’s dispositive Motion (ECF No. 29) and has filed 
a Motion to Amend her First Amended Complaint (ECF No. 30).               
    For  the  following  reasons,  the  Court  GRANTS  Santander’s  Motion  and 
DENIES Ms. Orabona’s Motions.                                             
                        I.   BACKGROUND                                  

    The following facts are those that are relevant to the ultimate disposition of 
the pending Motions and are derived from the plaintiff’s First Amended Complaint 
(ECF No. 20), unless otherwise noted.  The plaintiff, Lorna Orabona, began working 
as a Mortgage Development Officer (“MDO”) for Sovereign Bank in May 2008.  (ECF 
No. 20 ¶ 7.)  She became an employee of the defendant, Santander, when it purchased 

Sovereign Bank in 2013.    ¶ 9.                                           
    On  January  18,  2022,  Ms.  Orabona  advised  her  supervisor  that  she  had 
received an employment offer from Citizens Bank (“Citizens”).    ¶ 27.  She further 
told her supervisor that she was “still considering staying at Santander and wanted 
to re-negotiate her salary” and was advised by two supervisors that they would “get 
back to her to work something out.”     Yet, Ms. Orabona’s registration to the 

Nationwide Multistate Licensing System indicates that she began employment with 
Citizens on January 18, 2022, though she alleges that she did not actually start 
working  for  Citizens  on  that  date;  the  entry  was  made  so  that  she  could  have 
immediate health care coverage.   ¶ 47.                                   
    On January 21, 2022, Santander Human Resources notified Ms. Orabona that 
it was terminating her employment for forwarding company emails to her private 
email address.    ¶ 28.  (Ms. Orabona asserts that this was an email practice 

developed during the COVID-19 pandemic and that, in any event, the emails were 
pre-approvals  for  client  referrals  that  were  encrypted  and  “did  not  contain  any 
personal information.”    ¶ 29.)                                          
    On February 1, 2022, Santander announced national layoffs which would have 
included Ms. Orabona’s department and position.    ¶ 40.  The affected employees 
were notified that they were entitled to receive a severance payment.    ¶ 42.  Ms. 
Orabona asserts, however, that Santander “fraudulently advised [her] that she was 
terminated for cause and concealed the planned large-scal[e] layoff to deprive her of 
any eligibility of benefits, including but not limited to, severance.”    ¶ 48. 

    Santander maintains a Severance Enterprise Policy (the “Plan”) that provides 
the  requirements  and  standards  by  which  Santander  will  administer  severance 
benefits as well as the claims and appeals process.  (ECF No. 24-1.)      
    Ms. Orabona filed suit against Santander in Rhode Island Superior Court 
asserting claims under state law.  Santander removed the matter to this Court on the 
grounds of diversity jurisdiction, 28 U.S.C. § 1332.                      

    Previously in this litigation, Santander filed a motion to dismiss arguing that 
Ms. Orabona’s Complaint failed to state a claim upon which relief could be granted 
or alternatively that her claims were preempted by ERISA.  To support the latter 
argument, Santander attached the Plan as an exhibit and asserted it was an ERISA 
plan.  Ms. Orabona, however, disputed the authenticity and accuracy of the Plan 
exhibit and requested “discovery to inquire more into the applicable terms of the Plan 
and to properly determine whether this Plan is truly one that would be considered an 

ERISA plan.”  (ECF No. 7-1 at 18.)  Because ERISA preemption is a threshold and 
potentially dispositive issue, the Court granted this request, denied the motion to 
dismiss without prejudice, and allowed the parties to conduct limited discovery into 
the applicability and/or authenticity of the Plan.  The Court further ordered that after 
that discovery, should the parties not agree that Ms. Orabona’s claims are preempted 
by ERISA, Santander could file a motion for summary judgment on that issue.  
Having concluded that discovery, the parties do agree that the Plan is subject to 
ERISA, but they do not agree on preemption.                               
    After the discovery period, the Court also allowed Ms. Orabona to file an 

Amended Complaint.  In that pleading, she claims that Santander failed to follow a 
prior practice of progressive discipline and is therefore liable under Rhode Island law 
for a breach of an implied employment contract, breach of the implied covenant of 
good faith and fair dealing, and wrongful termination.  (ECF No. 20.)  She also claims 
fraudulent and negligent misrepresentation for Santander’s alleged termination of 
her to conceal the planned layoff and deprive her of benefits, including severance 

benefits.                                                                 
    Santander has filed a combined Motion for Summary Judgment on the ERISA 
preemption issue and renewed Motion to Dismiss on the merits.  (ECF No. 22.)  
Pending also is Ms. Orabona’s Motion to Strike (ECF No. 29) and Motion to Amend 
the First Amended Complaint (ECF No. 30).  The Court considers each motion in 
turn.                                                                     
                        II.  DISCUSSION                                  

 A. Motion to Strike                                                     

    Ms. Orabona moves to strike Santander’s Exhibit C, a copy of an email from 
Santander to her indicating that she had received the Plan.  (ECF No. 29.)  Ms. 
Orabona  argues  that  she  “has  not  been  able  to  conduct  full  discovery  on  the 
authenticity” of the email and that Santander has not provided “any meta data that 
would support the authenticity of such document, along with the ability to access the 
attachment links.”    at 2.  But the Court finds that Ms. Orabona has had the ability 
to conduct sufficient discovery on this email—it was provided to her in response to 
her request for production during the limited discovery period, she took a Rule 

30(b)(6) deposition of Santander and, although she inquired about other documents 
produced, did not about Exhibit C.  (ECF No. 35 ¶¶ 3-4, 5.)  She also did not seek 
further  information  on  Exhibit  C  through  other  discovery  methods.    Moreover, 
regarding the metadata, which it is unclear if Ms. Orabona had previously asked for, 
Santander has since provided her with that information.    ¶ 7.           
    The Court therefore denies the plaintiff’s Motion to Strike.         

 B. Motion to Dismiss; Motion for Summary Judgment                       

    The  Court  begins  with  the  threshold  issue  of  ERISA  preemption,  which 
Santander  brings  by  way  of  a  Motion  for  Summary  Judgment.    (ECF  No.  22.)  
Summary judgment is appropriate only when “there is no genuine dispute as to any 
material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.”  Fed. R. Civ. 
P. 56.                                                                    
    “Congress  enacted  ERISA  to  ‘protect  ...  the  interests  of  participants  in 
employee benefit plans and their beneficiaries’ by setting out substantive regulatory 
requirements” for such plans and “to ‘provid[e] for appropriate remedies, sanctions, 
and ready access to the Federal courts.’”            , 542 U.S. 200,      
208 (2004) (quoting 29 U.S.C. § 1001(b)).  ERISA provides civil enforcement remedies 
and “expansive pre-emption provisions” to “provide a uniform regulatory regime” for 
employee benefit plans.     Among the state laws that ERISA preempts are those 
that  amount  to  “alternative  enforcement  mechanisms”  to  the  civil  enforcement 
scheme in ERISA § 502(a).                         , 185 F.3d 1, 7 (1st    
Cir. 1999) (quoting                                                       

  , 514 U.S. 645, 658 (1995)).                                           
    In addition, ERISA § 514(a)—defensive preemption—is an affirmative defense 
to state-law causes of action.   , 185 F.3d at 4.  Under that section, “ERISA pre-
empts ‘any and all State laws insofar as they may now or hereafter relate to any 
employee benefit plan’ covered by ERISA.”                       ,         
592 U.S. 80, 86 (2020) (quoting 29 U.S.C. § 1144(a)).  But “not every state law that 

affects an ERISA plan” is preempted; rather, a state law is preempted when it “relates 
to an ERISA plan” which is defined by having (a) “a connection with” or (b) “reference 
to such a plan.”    (quoting         , 532 U.S. 141, 147 (2001));         
                         , 429 F.3d 294, 301-02 (1st Cir. 2005).         
    When a plaintiff asserts a claim under state law and the fact finder must refer 
to the terms of an ERISA plan, the claim is preempted by ERISA.           
        , 202 F.3d 44, 52 (1st Cir. 2000);             14 F.3d 697,      

700 (1st Cir. 1994).  This is true not only when it is necessary for a finding of liability, 
but even if reference to the plan is necessary only to calculate damages.   , 
202 F.3d at 52 (“We have held that ERISA preempts state law causes of action for 
damages where the damages must be calculated using the terms of an ERISA plan.”); 
                           , 49 F.3d 790, 794 (1st Cir. 1995).           
    As to Ms. Orabona’s negligent and fraudulent misrepresentation claims, the 
First Circuit has specifically held that ERISA preempts those state-law claims when 
the inquiry of liability or damages is directed to the Plan.              
   , 466 F.3d 13, 20 (1st Cir. 2006);  , 49 F.3d at 794 (holding that because the 

calculation of damages would require reference to the employee severance plan, 
ERISA preempted the plaintiff’s misrepresentation claim).  Here, the result should 
be no different.  Ms. Orabona asserts that Santander made false statements to her to 
conceal the employee benefits, including severance payments, for which she would 
have been eligible.  (ECF No. 20 ¶¶ 66-70; 74-77.)  The damages that naturally flow 
from these claims would be the value of those very benefits, as detailed by the Plan.  

Because the fact finder’s inquiry would  be “directed to the plan,” the claims of 
fraudulent and negligent misrepresentation (Counts IV and V) are preempted by 
ERISA.         , 49 F.3d at 794 (quoting                     , 498        
U.S. 133, 140 (1990)).                                                    
    That  leaves  Ms.  Orabona’s  claims  of  wrongful  termination,  breach  of  an 
implied employment contract, and breach of the implied covenant of good faith and 
fair dealing (Counts I-III).  Whether the damages that she seeks on these claims 

include the Plan’s benefits is less than clear in her First Amended Complaint.  But 
she rectified any lack of clarity in her objection to the instant Motion, stating, “the 
severance benefits would only be a portion of consequential damages of those claims.”  
(ECF  No.  26  at  27.)    Thus,  for  purposes  of  these  claims  Ms.  Orabona  has  not 
disclaimed  benefits  to  which  she  might  be  entitled  under  the  Plan  and  in  fact 
explicitly seeks them as part of her claim.                               
    The fact Ms. Orabona asserts that the Plan benefits are only a portion of the 
claim, however, does not affect the preemption analysis.  In  , the First Circuit 
noted that if the plaintiffs “were successful in their suit, the damages would consist 

in part” of ERISA plan benefits.  49 F.3d at 794.  Because the damages “were 
dependent, at least in part, on analysis of a qualified ERISA plan,” the claim was be 
preempted.    at 794-95.  Here, too, a calculation of Ms. Orabona’s damages would 
require reference to the Plan, at least in part.  Counts I-III are accordingly preempted 
under ERISA.                                                              
    Because Ms. Orabona’s claims are preempted under ERISA, the Court need 

not proceed to Santander’s further arguments, including its Motion to Dismiss Ms. 
Orabona’s First Amended Complaint for failure to state a claim upon which relief can 
be granted.                                                               
 C. Motion to Amend                                                      

    Ms. Orabona has filed a Motion to Amend her First Amended Complaint to 
correct a typographical error.  (ECF No. 30.)  The proposed change, to paragraph 63, 
which currently asserts that Santander did adhere to its policies and procedures 
when it terminated her, would make clear she alleges Santander  adhere to its 
policies and procedures.    at 1-2.  This allegation would support her wrongful 
termination claim which is premised on Santander’s alleged failure to comply with 
its past disciplinary practices.  But because the Court has determined that this claim, 
which seeks damages under the Plan, is preempted by ERISA, these particulars of 
her theory of liability are irrelevant.  The Court therefore denies the Motion to 
Amend.                                                                    
    In addition to her Motion to Amend, in her memorandum opposing Santander’s 
Motion to Dismiss/Motion for Summary Judgment, Ms. Orabona makes a general 

request to amend her First Amended Complaint should “the Court find[] deficiencies 
in  the  allegations  contained  in”  that  pleading.    (ECF  No.  26  at  29.)    Such  an 
approach—to ask for leave to amend contingent upon a court determining a complaint 
must  be  dismissed—is  disfavored  in  the  First  Circuit  because  it  “would impose 
unnecessary costs and inefficiencies on both the courts and party opponents” and 
“would dramatically undermine the ordinary rules governing the finality of judicial 

decisions.”                            , 512 F.3d 46, 57 (1st Cir. 2008)  
(quoting          , 716 F.2d 71,78 (1st Cir. 1983)).  Moreover, this is Santander’s 
second dispositive motion.  It filed one in response to the original Complaint, which 
the Court denied without prejudice to allow the parties limited discovery on the 
ERISA issue.  After that discovery was completed, the Court granted Ms. Orabona’s 
request to file a First Amended Complaint, on which Santander again moved to 
dismiss.  Ms. Orabona was “put on notice of the deficiencies in the complaint by the 

motion to dismiss. If [she] had something relevant to add, [she] should have moved 
to add it then.”                                     , 778 F.3d 228,      
247 (1st Cir. 2015).  Further, Ms. Orabona offers no indication as to what changes or 
additions a Second Amended Complaint would contain so the Court cannot assess 
whether such an amendment would be futile.                                
                        III.  CONCLUSION                                 

    For the foregoing reasons, the Court DENIES Ms. Orabona’s Motion to Strike 
(ECF No. 29) and Motion to Amend (ECF No. 30) and GRANTS Santander’s Motion 
for Summary Judgment on ERISA preemption (ECF No. 22).                    

IT IS SO ORDERED.                                                         


_________________________________                                         
Mary S. McElroy                                                           
United States District Judge                                              
September 25, 2024