UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            

                   DISTRICT OF MAINE                                 

ASSOCIATION TO PRESERVE       )                                           
AND PROTECT LOCAL             )                                           
LIVELIHOODS, B.H. PIERS, L.L.C.,  )                                       
GOLDEN ANCHOR L.C.,           )                                           
B.H.W.W., L.L.C., DELRAY      )                                           
EXPLORER HULL 495 LLC,        )                                           
DELRAY EXPLORER HULL 493      )                                           
LLC, and ACADIA EXPLORER 492  )                                           
LLC,                          )                                           
                         )                                           
     Plaintiffs,         )                                           
                         )                                           
                         )    No. 1:22-cv-00416-LEW                  
PENOBSCOT BAY AND RIVER       )                                           
PILOTS ASSOCIATION,           )                                           
                         )                                           
     Plaintiff-Intervenor,   )                                       
                         )                                           
v.                       )                                           
                         )                                           
TOWN OF BAR HARBOR,             )                                         
                         )                                           
     Defendant,          )                                           
                         )                                           
                         )                                           
CHARLES SIDMAN,               )                                           
                         )                                           
     Defendant-Intervenor.  )                                        

  ORDER ON MOTION FOR INJUNCTION PENDING APPEAL                      

Plaintiff  and  Plaintiff-Intervenor  (“Plaintiffs”)  move  for  an  injunction  pending 
appeal.  Am. Joint Mot. for Inj. Pending Appeal (“Motion,” ECF No. 228).  See Fed. R. 
App. P. 8(a)(1)(C).  Plaintiffs appeal this Court’s Final Judgment following a bench trial 
of the merits.  (ECF No. 206.)  The Amended Decision and Order on which the Judgment 
rests resolved their legal claims unfavorably by declining to invalidate in its entirety a 
municipal  ordinance  barring  daily  disembarkations  from  vessels  of  more  than  1,000 

persons per day over piers (or other property) situated in the Town of Bar Harbor (“the 
Ordinance”).  See Judgment (ECF No. 207); Amended Decision and Order (ECF No. 206).  
Through their Motion, Plaintiffs seek to secure cruise line reservations for the 2025 season, 
at a significantly higher visitation rate than what is permitted under the Ordinance. 
The following discussion presumes the reader’s familiarity with the underlying 
Amended Decision and Order.  Plaintiffs contend that they are likely to succeed on appeal 

by demonstrating that this Court (1) erroneously limited the preemptive impact of a federal 
regulation on the Ordinance’s use of the all-encompassing word “persons” and/or (2) 
misapprehended the teachings of certain commerce clause precedent concerned for the free 
flow of commerce.  See Mot. at 5 n.5.  For the reasons that follow, I deny the request for 
injunctive relief.                                                        

To secure from a district court injunctive relief pending appeal, “the moving party 
need not persuade the court that it is likely to be reversed on appeal.”  Canterbury Liquors 
& Pantry v. Sullivan, 999 F. Supp. 144, 150 (D. Mass. 1998).  However, “more than a mere 
possibility of relief is required.”  Nken v. Holder, 556 U.S. 418, 434 (2009) (internal 
quotation marks omitted).  The provision of a stay pending appeal is a discretionary matter 

attuned to the circumstance of the case at hand.  Id. at 433.  The exercise of that discretion 
is guided by the moving party’s ability to convincingly demonstrate the following: (1) 
likelihood of success on appeal; (2) irreparable harm absent injunctive relief; (3) a lack of 
substantial injury to others having an interest in the decision under appeal; and (4) service 
of the public interest.  Id. at 434; Arborjet, Inc. v. Rainbow Treecare Sci. Advancements, 
Inc., 794 F.3d 168, 171 (1st Cir. 2015).  Of these elements, the “first two factors are the 

most critical,” Respect Maine PAC v. McKee, 622 F.3d 13, 15 (1st 2010), but failure to 
“show a strong likelihood of success” on appeal is an independent basis for denial of an 
injunction pending appeal, id.; Acevedo-Garcia v. Vera-Monroig, 296 F.3d 13, 16 (1st Cir. 
2002) (per curiam); In re Elias, 182 Fed. App’x 3 (1st Cir. 2006) (per curiam). 
As  for  likelihood  of  success,  Plaintiffs  argue  that  I  missed  the  mark  when  I 
concluded that the scope of the preemptive impact of 33 C.F.R. § 105.237, which assures 

shore access for seafarers, is limited to prohibiting Bar Harbor from applying the term 
“persons” in a way that prevents seafarer shore access.  They contend that the ordinary 
result of federal preemption  is total abnegation of any state law or regulation when 
preemption carves out part of an expansive term like “persons.”  Mot. at 8–11.1  But, as 
Plaintiffs concede, the use of an expansive term like “persons” conveys a meaning that 

encompasses  a  long  list  of  entities  including  both  passengers  and  crew.    Mot.  at  7 
(“‘Persons’ certainly does not mean anything less than passengers, seafarers, and all other 
humans disembarking from cruise ships into Bar Harbor.”).  The Federal Seafarer Shore 
Access Regulation effectively draws a line through only one of the words on the list implied 
by the term “persons,” not the others.  Thus, the term “persons” still includes a list of readily 

ascertainable entities who remain subject to the Ordinance.               

1 Plaintiffs also suggest that Bar Harbor will be incapable of crafting workable rules to honor the preemptive 
impact of the Seafarer Shore Access Regulation.  I have considered this argument and find this contention 
to be less than persuasive.  Developing a limitation to honor seafarer shore access seems a rather 
abecedarian affair.                                                       
Plaintiffs otherwise acknowledge that the severability analysis considers whether 
the electorate “would have preferred what is left of the [Ordinance] to no [Ordinance] at 

all,” see Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of N. New England, 546 U.S. 320, 330 (2006), and 
whether the preemptive impact is so “integral” to the purpose or function of the Ordinance 
that the enacting body would not have enacted the Ordinance if it had foresight of the 
preemption  that  would  result  from  litigation,  Bayside  Enterprises,  Inc.  v.  Maine 
Agricultural Bargaining Bd., 513 A.2d 1355, 1360 (Me. 1986).  In this case, when the 
reach of the term “persons” is curtailed to “persons other than seafarers” (in practical effect, 

limited to passengers), it remains the case that the Ordinance is almost entirely capable of 
achieving the end for which it was drawn, i.e., stemming the tide of daily cruise ship 
visitation to vessels with lower berth capacities of 1,000 or less.  Given this reality, it would 
be illogical to conclude that the majority of the voters of Bar Harbor would prefer outright 
invalidation  to  a  slightly more  limited  application  of  the  term  “persons”  that  might, 

perhaps, permit a visit by a few additional vessels.  Likewise, it is wishful thinking to 
conclude that the electorate would have rejected the Ordinance had it understood that the 
term persons would be applied only to passengers.                         
That  leaves  the  “free  flow  of  commerce”  challenge.    Plaintiffs  argue  that  the 
Amended Decision and Order is reductive and improperly reduces free-flow jurisprudence 

into only two categories before moving on to the Pike v. Bruce Church analysis.  Mot. at 
11–12.  They assert that I failed to consider that the Ordinance “violates a well-established 
Commerce Clause restriction by interfering with ‘transportation into or through’ Bar 
Harbor  (and  Maine)  ‘beyond  [what]  is  absolutely  necessary  for  [Bar  Harbor’s]  self-
protection.’”  Id. at 13 (first quoting Hannibal & St. J.R. Co. v. Husen, 95 U.S. 465, 472 
(1877); and then quoting Bayley’s Campground v. Mills, 985 F.3d 153, 159–60 (1st Cir. 

2021)).                                                                   
The “absolutely necessary for its self-protection” standard briefly emerged in cases 
in which states enacted laws that had as their very object “to obstruct inter-state commerce, 
and to discriminate between the property of citizens of one State and that of citizens of 
other States.”  Hannibal, 95 U.S. at 470.  The Bar Harbor Ordinance under review in this 
case does not have as its object the obstruction of commerce or discrimination in favor of 

local market participants.  Instead, its object is to protect a small harbor community against 
the localized negative impacts of outsized cruise tourism.  It is as though the State of Maine 
concluded (albeit through the Town of Bar Harbor exercising its home rule authority) that 
cruise tourism generally should continue unabated throughout the State, but that limitations 
on the volume of daily traffic are appropriate in the small port of Bar Harbor most heavily 

burdened with such traffic, where the burden is the product of an economy of scale 
practiced by a narrow group of market participants to the detriment of local conditions.  
This  was  a  primary  point  observed  in  the  Amended  Decision  and  Order,  that  “the 
Commerce Clause does not protect the cruise line industry’s ‘particular structure [and] 
methods of operation.’”  Am. Dec. and Order at 58 (alteration in original) (quoting Exxon 

Corp. v. Governor of Maryland, 437 U.S. 117, 127 (1978)).  Yet Plaintiffs’ request for an 
injunction pending appeal is silent on this point.                        
The most recent reference to the “absolutely necessary for its self-protection” 
standard in a majority Supreme Court decision appears in Hennington v. State of Georgia, 
163 U.S. 299 (1896), which upheld a state law barring the running of all trains, including 
interstate trains, on Sunday.2  The Supreme Court rejected a Commerce Clause challenge, 

observing that police power regulations having a “real relation to the domestic peace, order, 
health, and safety of their people, but which by their necessary operation, affect to some 
extent . . . the conduct of commerce among the states, are yet not invalid by force alone of 
the grant of power to congress to regulate such commerce.”  Id. at 317.  Such regulations 
ordinarily “are to be respected in the courts of the Union until they are superseded and 
displaced by some act of [C]ongress passed in execution of the power granted to it by the 

constitution.”  Id.  After all, such local laws “have their source in the powers which the 
states reserved, and never surrendered to congress, of providing for the public health, the 
public morals, and the public safety, and are not, within the meaning of the constitution, 
and considered in their own nature, regulations of interstate commerce, simply because, 
. . to a limited extent, they cover the field occupied by those engaged in such commerce.”  

Id. at 317–18.                                                            
As explained in the Amended Decision and Order, it is proper that local legislatures 
should regulate “in matters admitting of diversity of treatment, according to the special 
requirements of local conditions, . . . until Congress sees fit to act.”  Am. Dec. and Order 
at 52 (quoting Sproles v. Binford, 286 U.S. 374, 390 (1932)); see also id. at 52. n.32 

(quoting National Pork Producers Council v. Ross, 598 U.S. at 375 (recognizing “the usual 

2 See Lake Shore & M. S. R. Co. v. State of Ohio, 173 U.S. 285, 292-98 (1899) (upholding over Commerce 
Clause challenge Ohio law that required passenger trains to stop at a designated minimum number of Ohio 
municipalities as a condition of running trains in the state, observing that states are free to legislate in 
matters of the public convenience or general good unless or until Congress legislates otherwise (collecting 
cases)).                                                                  
legislative power of a State to act upon persons and property within the limits of its own 
territory, a feature of our constitutional order that allows different communities to live with 

different local standards” (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)), and Maine v. 
Taylor, 477 U.S. 131, 151 (1986) (“The Commerce Clause significantly limits the ability 
of States and localities to regulate or otherwise burden the flow of interstate commerce, but 
it does not elevate free trade above all other values.  As long as a State does not needlessly 
obstruct interstate trade or attempt to place itself in a position of economic isolation, it 
retains broad regulatory authority to protect the health and safety of its citizens and the 

integrity of its natural resources.” (internal quotation marks omitted))).   
Congress simply is not in the exclusive position to regulate the standards by which 
small port communities interface with cruise line tourism.  Plaintiffs acknowledge but do 
not actually engage with this principle.  Instead, Plaintiffs attempt to sidestep it altogether 
by relying on precedent involving, for example, a state’s effort to control pricing in the 

context of interstate rail freight, Wabash v. Illinois, 118 U.S. 557 (1886), and puzzling 
Prohibition Era jurisprudence, Leisy v. Hardin, 135 U.S. 100 (1890).  The price regulation 
effort  in  Wabash  involved  a  local  undertaking  that  the  Supreme  Court  described  as 
producing an “obvious injustice” that “show[ed] the value of the constitutional provision 
which confides the power of regulating interstate commerce to the congress of the United 

States.”  118 U.S. at 576–77.  Price regulation and the danger of follow-on legislation by 
other states involves a “species of regulation” that “must be, if established at all, of a 
general and national character, and cannot be safely and wisely remitted to local rules and 
local regulations.”  Id. at 577.  Not so here.  As for Leisy, the Supreme Court’s Prohibition 
Era precedent has its own unfortunate history and is unhelpful in the current context.  In 
Leisy, the Supreme Court stated that transportation between states should be “free,” id. at 

113, then advanced a legal doctrine that had the effect of giving out of state purveyors of 
alcohol a market to sell alcohol in states that prohibited the sale of alcohol altogether, an 
odd state of affairs that Congress abrogated through legislation.  See Tennessee Wine & 
Spirits Retailers Ass’n v. Thomas, 588 U.S. 504, 523–24 (2019).           
That leaves the Commerce Clause standard articulated in National Pork Producers 
Council, 598 U.S. 356, which expounds on the standard found in Pike v. Bruce Church, 

Inc., 397 U.S. 137 (1970).  When I review Plaintiff’s Motion, it appears to me that Plaintiffs 
seek to sidestep this line of inquiry altogether based on the precedent discussed above, 
rather than engage with the Pike standard directly.  For the reasons set forth above, I find 
that their approach is not likely to succeed.  Because the likelihood of success is the 
weightiest factor, an injunction pending appeal is not appropriate in this case.   

The Amended Motion for Preliminary Injunction Pending Appeal is DENIED (ECF 
No. 228).                                                                 
SO ORDERED.                                                          
Dated this 21st day of June, 2024.                                   

                              /s/ Lance E. Walker                    
                              Chief U.S. District Judge

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            

                   DISTRICT OF MAINE                                 

ASSOCIATION TO PRESERVE       )                                           
AND PROTECT LOCAL             )                                           
LIVELIHOODS, B.H. PIERS, L.L.C.,  )                                       
GOLDEN ANCHOR L.C.,           )                                           
B.H.W.W., L.L.C., DELRAY      )                                           
EXPLORER HULL 495 LLC,        )                                           
DELRAY EXPLORER HULL 493      )                                           
LLC, and ACADIA EXPLORER 492  )                                           
LLC,                          )                                           
                         )                                           
     Plaintiffs,         )                                           
                         )                                           
                         )    No. 1:22-cv-00416-LEW                  
PENOBSCOT BAY AND RIVER       )                                           
PILOTS ASSOCIATION,           )                                           
                         )                                           
     Plaintiff-Intervenor,   )                                       
                         )                                           
v.                       )                                           
                         )                                           
TOWN OF BAR HARBOR,             )                                         
                         )                                           
     Defendant,          )                                           
                         )                                           
                         )                                           
CHARLES SIDMAN,               )                                           
                         )                                           
     Defendant-Intervenor  )                                         

            AMENDED1 DECISION AND ORDER                              

In this action, a group of Bar Harbor businesses and business owners who seek to 
preserve commercial relationships with cruise lines and their passengers challenge a local 
exercise of popular sovereignty by the people of Bar Harbor who seek to curtail cruise ship 
visitation to maintain a certain quality of local life.  The resulting controversy is of 
constitutional dimension and tenders a host of questions, but chiefly asks whether a 

municipality  with  privately  owned  port  facilities  can  restrain  interstate  cruise  ship 
commerce for local welfare ends or must make way and permit whatever level of commerce 
the local market can support.                                             
The matter proceeded to a bench trial following the Court’s issuance of an expedited 
schedule and Plaintiffs’ withdrawal of a motion for preliminary injunction.  The Town of 
Bar Harbor has agreed not to enforce the challenged land use ordinance pending the 

outcome of litigation.  Following a three-day trial in July 2023, the parties submitted 
closing arguments in writing.  Based on my consideration of the evidentiary record, the 
arguments of counsel, and the law, judgment will enter in favor of the Defendant Town of 
Bar Harbor on every count but one, and even as to that one count, judgment will enter 
partially for the Town, as only limited declaratory relief is awarded in recognition of a 

partial preemption problem, without affording Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor the relief 
they are seeking.                                                         
                        FINDINGS                                     
                       The Parties                                   
The Plaintiffs in this action are the Association to Preserve and Protect Local 

Livelihoods (“APPLL”); B.H. Piers, L.L.C.; Golden Anchor, L.C., doing business as 
Harborside Hotel; BHWW LLC, doing business as Bar Harbor Whale Watch; Delray 
Explorer Hull 495 LLC; Delray Explorer Hull 493 LLC; and Acadia Explorer 492, LLC. 
APPLL is a business league comprised of members who own or operate businesses 
in Bar Harbor and seek to capitalize on the economic opportunities associated with the 

provision of goods and services to cruise ship passengers.  APPLL members include 
owners and employees of local restaurants, retail stores, and tour-related businesses. 
The Delray Explorer Hulls and the Acadia Explorer are tender vessels owned by 
similarly named limited liability companies.  The vessels carry cruise ship passengers from 
cruise ships anchored in Frenchman Bay to Bar Harbor.  B.H. Piers and Golden Anchor 
own piers in Bar Harbor where the tender vessels disembark and embark cruise ship 

passengers.  BH Piers operates the pier located at 1 West Street, known as Harbor Place.  
Golden Anchor operates the pier located at 55 West Street.  The pier owners have received 
approval from the Coast Guard for the use of the piers for this purpose.  
BHWW is a limited liability company doing business as Bar Harbor Whale Watch 
Company.    BHWW  coordinates  whale  watching  tours  to  cater  to  the  cruise  lines’ 

passengers.                                                               
The  Penobscot  Bay  and  River  Pilots  Association  appears  in  this  matter  as 
Intervenor-Plaintiff.  The Pilots Association is a private corporation that provides pilotage 
services in a region that extends 75 miles from Boothbay Harbor to Frenchman Bay and 
75 miles from the west pilot station on Penobscot Bay to the Penobscot River Port of 

Brewer.  By law, foreign-flagged and certain domestic cruise ships must be piloted within 
Frenchman Bay by a local pilot who is familiar with the Bay and its channels.  Pilots board 
cruise ships (and other large vessels) eight to twelve miles offshore and direct navigation 
to anchorage grounds in Frenchman Bay (or to other destinations in Penobscot Bay).  The 
anchorage  grounds  in  Frenchman  Bay  are  roughly  two  miles  from  the  Bar  Harbor 
waterfront and piers.  The Pilots Association’s pilotage operations are regulated by the 

Maine Pilotage Commission.  In response to the expansion of cruise vessel traffic, the 
Pilots Association has invested in vessels and has expanded its employment of pilots.  In 
particular, the Pilots Association now has a dedicated crew and purpose-built vessel to 
handle the piloting demands associated with cruise vessel traffic in Frenchman Bay.  Fees 
for piloting services are established by law and are a function of the size of the vessel.  Ex. 
39.  The larger the ship, the greater the fee.                            

The Defendant is the Town of Bar Harbor.  Bar Harbor is, among other things, a 
Class A port of entry for foreign-flagged cruise vessels reentering the United States and a 
popular port-of-call on North Atlantic cruise ship itineraries.  Bar Harbor is governed by a 
Town Council.  The Bar Harbor Town Council has sponsored a cruise ship committee for 
more than a dozen years, but recently disbanded the committee.  The Town of Bar Harbor 

has a year-round population of roughly 5,500 persons, a number comparable to the lower 
berth capacity (a rough measure of passenger capacity) of a solitary large cruise ship. 
One of the residents of Bar Harbor is Charles Sidman, Intervenor Defendant.  Mr. 
Sidman owns an art gallery in town.  Mr. Sidman was a primary proponent and co-author 
of the initiative that resulted in the land use ordinance challenged in this case. 

                    Non-Parties of Note                              
Among the cruise lines that visit Bar Harbor are several lines owning foreign-
flagged cruise vessels.  When they call, these vessels typically spend about nine hours at 
anchorage, enough time for passengers to clear customs and participate in a shore visit of 
reasonable duration.                                                      

The State of Maine has two other Class A ports of entry, Eastport and Portland.  
Neither is as proximate to Acadia National Park as Bar Harbor.  If a cruise ship called in 
Eastport or Portland, travel by motor coach to reach and return from Acadia National Park 
would consume much of the day.                                            
The  Maine  Office  of  Tourism  is  a  marketing  agency  for  the  State  of  Maine.  
CruiseMaine, part of the Maine Office of Tourism, promotes cruise communities in Maine 

and Maine-based cruise ship tourism in general.  CruiseMaine engages with cruise lines 
and the cruise industry trade association and sometimes functions as a municipality-to-
cruise-line liaison.  The Maine Office of Tourism and CruiseMaine perceive cruise travel 
as a positive type of tourism for Maine because it introduces many first-time visitors to 
Maine from a broader geographical region as compared to visitors who travel by land, most 

of whom are from east coast states and Canada.  CruiseMaine maintains a software 
platform called the PortCall system, https://maine.portcall.com.  Through the PortCall 
system, CruiseMaine posts real-time data related to vessel movements and port operations.  
State funding supports CruiseMaine.                                       
Carnival, Royal Caribbean, and Norwegian are among the cruise line companies 

that are active in New England and market cruise itineraries that feature Bar Harbor as a 
marquee port.  These three cruise lines are noted because they operate foreign-flagged 
vessels and operate some of the largest cruise vessels that call in Bar Harbor and elsewhere 
along the Maine coast.2  The foreign-flagged lines see Bar Harbor as the most convenient 
and desirable port of entry when coming from foreign waters (such as Canadian waters). 

                     Background Facts                                
The Town of Bar Harbor lies on the shores of Frenchman Bay in the North Atlantic 
on the eastern side of Mount Desert Island.  The Town is nestled in an area of great scenic 
beauty abutting Acadia National Park, a national asset that the Park Service refers to as the 
Crown Jewel of the North Atlantic Coast.  Given Bar Harbor and Acadia National Park’s 
placement and prominence among other North Atlantic attractions accessible by sea, the 

cruise ship industry regards Bar Harbor as a marquee destination, the kind which appeals 
to customers and around which an appealing cruise itinerary can be built. 
Although Bar Harbor had long experienced healthy tourist seasons, in the 2000s 
there was room for growth.  Additionally, the season was limited to the period between 
Memorial Day and Labor Day.  Local businesses and their representatives on the Town 

Council hoped to expand the tourist season and saw cruise tourism as one means of doing 
so.                                                                       
In 2006, the Maine Department of Transportation, the Maine Port Authority, and 
the Town of Bar Harbor joined in a task force to commission a cruise tourism destination 
management  plan  for  Bar  Harbor.    The  authors  of  the  management  plan  proposed 

architectural and engineering improvements to develop the Town to facilitate expanded 


2 MSC Cruises is a fourth cruise line that fits the description.  The executive director of CruiseMaine 
characterized the domestic cruise lines as “smaller.”  In addition to Bar Harbor, Eastport, Portland, and 
Rockland have ports suited to larger foreign vessels.  Only Bar Harbor and Portland have significant traffic 
involving foreign cruise vessels seeking a Class A port of entry, with Bar Harbor and Portland having 
cruise ship passenger access, chiefly by means of improved pier facilities.  Ex. 260.  In 
2008, the Town accepted a recommendation from the task force to embody a cruise ship 

committee and establish a policy of daily cruise passenger caps of 3,500 passengers for the 
peak-tourism, summer months of July and August, and 5,500 passengers for the shoulder-
season months of May, June, September, October, and November.  The cruise ship lines 
were receptive to the invitation and amenable to the passenger caps, and cruise ships began 
to call in Frenchman Bay in ever-increasing numbers.  Local enterprise and investment 
gradually expanded to meet the increased demand for passenger tendering and other local 

services.                                                                 
The Town established its daily passenger caps largely by reference to the lower 
berth capacities of existing cruise vessels.  The caps were understood to be “voluntary” in 
that they were mutually acceptable to the then-existing Council and the cruise lines.  The 
Council and the cruise line industry were able to agree that cruise line passengers generally 

would not be well served in Bar Harbor if two or more cruise ships each with an especially 
large lower berth capacity were to disembark on the same day, even during the quieter 
shoulder season.  They also recognized that it was sensible to lower the cap during Bar 
Harbor’s peak summer season, given the competing demand for local services generated 
by peak, land-based tourism.  The progenitors of Bar Harbor’s cruise ship management 

plan  also  understood  that  cruise  ship  visitations  impose  certain  municipal  burdens,3 


3 Bar Harbor maintains a per-passenger fee structure for cruise ship visits.  Ex. 29.  The Town has used the 
fees generated in this manner (roughly $1 million per year) to fund town salaries and enlarge its police 
force, among other things.  The increase in personnel, particularly law enforcement, is itself indicative of 
including congestion, that can detract from the character of the Town and reduce the quality 
of life for residents.  To manage the cap, the Town instituted a reservation system overseen 

by its harbormaster.  When the new reservation system was first instituted, cruise ship visits 
were not yet a daily phenomenon, despite the reference to “daily” caps.   
Over the past 15 years, Bar Harbor has experienced a steady growth in its tourist 
season, due chiefly to its proximity to Acadia National Park.  In 2021, Acadia National 
Park attracted roughly four million visitors.  For many of these visitors, a trip to Acadia 
includes a visit to downtown Bar Harbor.  Meanwhile, more and larger cruise ships 

anchored in Frenchman Bay and cruise ship passenger visitation levels started to approach 
or meet the established daily caps on an ever-increasing and consistent basis.  Although 
cruise ship passengers account for a limited portion of the total number of annual visitors 
to greater Bar Harbor and Mount Desert Island, they arrive at a destination that is already 
blessed and burdened by land-based tourism and at a waterfront of rather limited area.  

Cruise ship passenger traffic also has a pronounced impact on and near the waterfront, 
including the eastern portion of West Street and the northern portion of Main Street. 
Over the same period of years, the process of tendering passengers to shore has 
become a more efficient operation.  In the early years, the Tender Parties (i.e., the pier 
owners,  tender-vessel  LLCs,  and  BHWW)  would  augment  the  cruise  lines’  tender 

operations so that passengers came ashore in a variety of ships, including whale watch 
ships.  In 2017, the Tender Parties designed and built three vessels dedicated to tendering 
cruise  ship  passengers.    They  also  invested  in  barges  to  facilitate  the  movement  of 
passengers from the cruise ships to the tender vessels.  While these developments are 
commendable from the standpoint of market efficiency, part of the transactional cost is that 
the demand for tender operations means that cruise ship tenders have become the dominant 
harbor traffic during the expanded cruising season.4                      

For some, the expansion of tourism resulted in a return on planning and investment.  
For others, it resulted in a growing disaffection with municipal life.  Increasingly, town 
leaders heard from constituents who were experiencing this disaffection.5  Then came 
COVID.  During the visitation-hiatus brought about by COVID quarantine orders—which 
restrictions impacted both land and sea visitation to Bar Harbor and Acadia National 

Park—some  residents  of  Bar  Harbor  were  reminded  that  there  are  measures  of  a 
municipality’s success other than its volume of business.                 
In January of 2021, Bar Harbor commissioned a marketing research firm to perform 
a quantitative study and write a report concerning local opinions.6  Ex. 323.  The survey 


4 Each of the three tender vessels is licensed to hold 149 passengers and they steadily rotate into and out of 
the harbor in roughly 30-minute intervals, primarily disembarking passengers onto the piers mid-morning 
and embarking them again in the afternoon, though passengers move back and forth throughout the day.  
Consequently, there are times of day that involve more intense movement of people in either direction, not 
unlike the tide, albeit more regular in terms of timing.  Foreign-flagged vessels, for example, arrive mid-
morning and spend on average nine hours at anchorage.  Their passengers spend on average six to seven 
hours on land in various locations, including downtown Bar Harbor.  In the morning, passengers congregate 
near the piers and waterfront, including at motor coach staging areas, while some passengers walk into the 
Town.  Passengers may be in any number of locations during the day, such as on a whale watch tour or an 
Acadia bus tour, or at a local restaurant or business.  In the afternoon, passengers (and their assorted 
conveyances) again congregate near the piers to obtain passage back to their cruise ship. 

5 Town Council Chair Valerie Peacock testified that in 2020 and continuing residents of Bar Harbor have 
expressed strong feelings of angst over the perceived negative impact of the cruise ship industry, but also 
concern over the expansion of tourism in general.  July 13 Tr. at 112–13, 121–25. 

6 Pan Atlantic Research’s study surveyed year-round and seasonal residents, property owners, and business 
owners of Bar Harbor to examine what they thought about sea-based tourism.  See generally Ex. 323.  
Overcrowding, too many ships/tourists, and environmental concerns ranked among the most popular 
answers to Bar Harbor’s greatest challenges in managing cruise ship tourism.  Ex. 323 at 29; see also July 
13 Tr. at 212:14–214:9 (describing the increased street traffic and congestion at the waterfront when cruise 
had a healthy response rate.  Many respondents voiced concern for the congestion7 caused 
by cruise ship visits and ranked cruise ship tourism a net negative for the Town.  The 

growing concern over popular sentiment was also acknowledged by the cruise industry.  In 
July of 2021, the president of the Cruise Lines International Association proposed new 
passenger caps as part of a “negotiation” with the Town.  The proposal, accepted by the 
Town Council, involved a daily passenger reduction for the shoulder season8 and a new 
monthly cap of 65,000 visitors specifically to address concerns of capacity.  Although 
public pressure was growing, the Bar Harbor Town Council, ultimately, was not then 

constituted to provide the pressure relief that many citizens hoped for.9 
On February 15, 2022, the Council approved the formation and membership of a 
new working group to explore the modification of the daily passenger limits for the 2023 
and 2024 cruise seasons.10  On August 16, 2022, the Town Council accepted the task 
force’s recommendation to enter into a memorandum of agreement (“MOA”) with each 



7 Congestion is not exclusively a matter of pedestrian congestion on sidewalks.  Congestion includes 
vehicular congestion and overcrowding of stores, parks, and other public spaces. 

8 By 2019, it was a misnomer to describe the months of September and October as a “shoulder season” 
when describing the volume of cruise ship passengers coming ashore in Bar Harbor.  In fact, over 60 percent 
of Bar Harbor’s annual cruise ship passenger visits occur in September and October.  September and 
October are also the months that see the most visitation by the very largest vessels (>3,500 passengers).  
See, e.g., Ex. 165.  According to CruiseMaine’s director, the number of cruise visitors entering Bar Harbor 
in September and October is roughly equivalent to the number of tourists on town streets in June and July. 

9 At trial, counsel for Plaintiffs worried that testimony concerning public disaffection and council activities 
(much of Chair Peacock’s testimony) was an attempt to construct a false legislative history in support of 
the Ordinance.  I have not interpreted the testimony in that fashion.  Rather, the testimony related some of 
the contemporaneous local history that set the stage for the success of the Initiative. 

10 Separately, the Bar Harbor Cruise Ship Committee was already corresponding with the Cruise Lines 
cruise line and directed the preparation of a form MOA for circulation.11  The resulting 
MOA withdrew the months of April and November from the Town’s reservation system, 

lowered daily passenger caps from 5,500 to 3,800 for the months of May, June, September, 
and October (with a +200-passenger leeway), and instituted a new monthly cap of 65,000.  
In September and October of 2022, the Town entered into MOAs with American Cruise 
Lines, Disney Cruise Lines, Holland America Line, Hurtigruten Expeditions, Norwegian 
Cruise Line, Pearl Seas Cruises, Princess Cruises, Rogay Caribbean Cruises, Seabourn 
Cruise Line, Viking Cruises, and Windstar Cruises Marshall Islands.       

While the Town Council publicly pursued its voluntary measures, a group of local 
residents formed a petitioning committee to advance a citizens’ initiative that would 
achieve  more  significant  reductions  by  mandatory  means.    Their  initiative  proposed 
amending the Bar Harbor Code to require a permit to disembark cruise ship passengers 
“on, over, or across any property located within the Town of Bar Harbor.”  Ex. 243A.  It 

also specified that “no more than 1,000 passengers, in the aggregate, may disembark on a 
single calendar day.”  Id.  The Initiative called for a $100 minimum penalty per excess 
unauthorized disembarkation, which would be assessed against the property owners (the 
Pier  Operators).    The  Initiative  states  that  the  harbormaster  shall  develop  rules  and 
regulations to establish a reservation system for disembarkation, a mechanism for counting 

and  tracking  disembarkations,  a  procedure  for  reporting  violations,  and  “any  other 


11 Two weeks prior, on August 2, 2022, the Town Council went into executive session to discuss the 
citizens’ petition that would become the Ordinance but was, at that time, still in need of voter approval.  
Exs. 207–210.  The Town Council also conducted a workshop on that date to discuss the future of cruise 
tourism in Bar Harbor.  Among other matters under consideration were cautionary litigation warnings from 
provisions” deemed necessary.  Id.  By the time the Initiative went to vote, the citizens’ 
group had revised it by substituting the word “persons” for “passengers.”  Ex. 243B.  They 

did this based on a group member’s observation that cruise ships carry a great many 
crewmembers as well as passengers.  The group decided it would be best to use the term 
persons to capture both passengers and crew.  Ex. 230.                    
The Initiative included a lengthy statement of purpose focusing on quality of life, 
but also expressing concern for public safety and the commercial interests of businesses 
other than those seeking the patronage of cruise ship passengers.         

Concerning quality of life, the Initiative’s sponsors wrote:         
Underlying this proposed amendment is the fact that, in recent years, the 
Town has been a popular port of call for cruise ships of varying sizes, from 
which passengers disembark via tender boats that offload passengers directly 
into the downtown area. The large numbers of passengers have overwhelmed 
the downtown area, resulting in excessive congestion and traffic on public 
streets  and  sidewalks,  frequent  overcrowding  of  parks  and  other  public 
spaces, and inundating local amenities and attractions, all of which result in 
a diminished quality of life for Town residents.                     

Ex. 243A.  Concerning public safety and other business interests, the sponsors wrote: 

The unchecked and continued influx of disembarking cruise ship passengers 
in the downtown area jeopardizes the Town’s ability to deliver municipal 
services to Town residents and visitors (for example, cruise ship passengers), 
including the provision of public safety services (police and fire), emergency 
medical services (EMS), in-patient and out-patient services at local hospitals, 
pandemic control measures, and public sanitation services, and also impacts 
the ability of local shops, restaurants, and other businesses to attract and 
serve customers.                                                     

Id.  The sponsors then summarized:                                        

A town-wide survey was conducted in 2021, showing that a majority of 
respondents believe that the volume of disembarking cruise ship passengers 
is too high and has a negative impact on the Town and the health, safety and 
welfare of its residents.                                            
Id.                                                                       
The Initiative was listed as an article on the warrant for Bar Harbor’s November 8, 
2022, special town meeting.  A majority of the registered voters who voted supported the 
article.  Bar Harbor now has a land use ordinance that establishes a disembarkation cap of 

1,000 persons per day.                                                    
During trial, Mr. Sidman testified that the 1,000-person cap was not the product of 
“a rigorously defensible finding or study or calculation.”  July 13 Tr. at 312:20–21.  The 
group proposed various caps, some higher, but ultimately arrived at 1,000 persons.  In 
communication with other members of his group, Mr. Sidman expressed a preference for 
smaller cruise ships because the passengers on smaller cruise ships tend to be more well-

to-do.  He also expressed a dislike of “the biggies,” meaning the larger cruise ships. 
                  Subsequent Rulemaking                              
A  variety  of  details  remain  for  purposes  of  sorting  out  the  best  approach  to 
implementing the Ordinance.  These include proposed rulemaking to exclude crew from 
the 1,000-person limit (for reasons that will be explained shortly), determining how best to 

monitor passenger volume, and determining how to proceed in the event the limit is 
disregarded  by  the  Pier  Owners.    See,  e.g.,  Exs.  66,  204.    However,  at  present 
implementation and rulemaking are suspended pending this immediate facial challenge to 
the Ordinance.                                                            
        Findings Concerning the Initiative’s Stated Purposes         

To the extent the Initiative expresses concern for public safety due to congestion 
located anywhere other than the waterfront, West Street and lower Main Street, there is no 
empirical data to enable a fact finder to allocate responsibility for a degradation in overall 
municipal public safety between cruise and land-based tourism.  But at the waterfront, the 

press of cruise ship passengers is sufficient to raise safety concerns.  Indeed, the initiative 
sponsors’ stated concern for public safety is echoed by the cruise industry.  Ex. 32 §§ 5.3, 
5.4.  However, at least to date there does not appear to be an incident illustrating any past 
failure  in  the  delivery  of  public  services  occasioned  by  passenger  congestion  at  the 
waterfront.                                                               
Where the stated purposes have greater significance is in regard to congestion and 

all  that  congestion  entails,  such  as  overtaxed  public  facilities,  long  lines,  crowded 
sidewalks and  businesses,  slowed  traffic,  and  the  like.    To  be  fair,  some days  with 
pronounced congestion in Bar Harbor may occur when a cruise ship is not at anchorage.  
Nighttime congestion may be particularly bad on some evenings, despite the absence of 
cruise ship passengers.  But the idea proposed by Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor that 

cruise ship traffic has a negligible impact on local conditions is disingenuous.  What video 
evidence was presented by Plaintiffs or Plaintiff-Intervenor was more in the nature of pro-
cruise marketing material that was not representative of the daily impact of cruise-related 
visitation and, instead, depicted quieter moments on quieter days.        
It is not the fault of cruise ship passengers that the area is congested; it simply is the 

reality of conditions existing on the ground.  Cruise ship passengers come ashore in an area 
of limited space nestled between the Public Pier and Harborside Hotel.  One of the piers 
over which cruise ship passengers travel sits at the east end the harbor, adjacent to the 
Public Pier, near the juncture of Main Street and West Street.  The other pier sits at the 
west end of the harbor.  Between them is a short stretch of commercialized waterfront along 
West Street.  The passengers’ impact on the relatively confined waterfront area is marked,12 

though their spillover impact on the Town more widely is best described as cumulative.  
But even further up Main Street and in public areas the impact is real and tangible to locals 
who visit the downtown.                                                   
As attested to by witnesses Dr. Bill Horner, Nathan Young, and Seth Libby, the 
press of people in the downtown intensifies on cruise ship days.  Dr. Horner described it 
as a dramatic growth in the press of people with a tremendous amount of traffic, particularly 

in the waterfront area.  Mr. Young described sidewalks busy enough that he prefers to walk 
in the street when he has to go downtown on a cruise ship day.  Mr. Libby described the 
scene similarly, stating that cruise ship visits produce greater crowding.  The witnesses also 
testified that  they avoid the downtown on  cruise ship days due  to the extent  of the 
congestion.  Horner, Libby, and Young all testified that they voted in favor of the initiative 

because they felt that elected officials had failed to act in a timely or meaningful manner 
to curtail the impact of cruise ship visits.  I find that these witnesses provided a fair and 
accurate assessment of the impact of cruise ship visits in terms of both the intensification 
of congestion and the undesirability of a trip downtown for many residents on “cruise ship 
days,” which increasingly means most days of the cruise ship season.13    


12 See, e.g., Ex. 32 § 5.3.  Congestion is bad enough that the Cruise Line Industry Association has proposed 
that Bar Harbor give over to cruise passenger traffic most of the public pier as well.  Id. at §§ 5.3, 5.8.  This 
would effectively give over the vast majority of Bar Harbor’s waterfront to the primary function of 
facilitating cruise ship passenger arrival and departure during the cruising season. 

13 Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor offered the testimony of Professor Todd Gabe, Ph.D., of the University 
of Maine, who studied congestion in Bar Harbor’s tourist district.  One study occurred at the tail end of 
Congestion in downtown Bar Harbor is a seasonal fact of life, but it is empirically 
exacerbated by the regular morning and afternoon pulse of cruise ship passengers and the 
tour buses and other vehicles14 that arrive to cater to them.  In addition, fall congestion is 

largely a function of cruise ship visitation, resulting in an undeniable change to the annual 
rhythm of municipal life.  Cruise ship passenger visitations may well be viewed by rational 
voters as indulgent and burdensome surplusage in an already taxed ecosystem.  In this 
sense, the initiative sponsors’ stated concern for generalized welfare and quality-of-life 
considerations is neither unsubstantiated nor unrelated to the unique congestion problem 

associated with high-berth cruise tourism, let alone arbitrary and irrational.15 
           Findings Concerning the Ordinance’s Impacts               
Most of the cruise lines that schedule visits to Bar Harbor plan visits in cruise ships 
having a lower berth capacity in excess of 1,000.  Only 27 of the 134 ships scheduled to 
make calls in the 2023 season would be able to disembark their entire complement of 

passengers without exceeding the cap.  It appears unlikely that a cruise line will schedule 

daily 3,500 passenger cap for August) would result in only a negligible further experience of congestion in 
a town already impacted by land-based tourism and the baseline 3,500 cruise ship passengers.  Ex. 319 at 
2.  Professor Gabe also spent a number of days walking about Bar Harbor and recording his subjective 
experience at various times and locations.  About half of the walks he took were “at times early in the 
morning, during months outside the peak tourism seasons and in inclement weather, or at places located on 
the outskirts of the tourism district.”  Ex. 319 at 6.  I did not find Professor Gabe’s testimony or reports to 
be helpful in terms of achieving whatever finding Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor intended me to draw. 

14 See, e.g., Ex 12A; Ex. 32 § 4.2.  In addition to tour buses, there are vans, minibuses, motor coaches, taxis, 
and bike tours.  While the pulses of congestion are most keen in the mid-morning and afternoon, there is a 
greater mid-day press as well, which the restaurateur members of APPLL seek to capitalize on. 

15 Plaintiffs insist that the Town of Bar Harbor must prove that the Ordinance can be based on a finding that 
the  one-thousand-and-first  passenger disembarked  and  every  passenger  who follows  is  somehow a 
“noxious” or “toxic” threat to the well-being of the Town.  See, e.g., Pls.’ Reply Br. at 6, 16, 20, 34.  I do 
not believe that is the test.  The Ordinance is obviously designed to draw a line between levels of impact 
occasioned by the berth capacities of cruise ships, not the relative innocuousness or noxiousness of 
a port call for purposes of a shore visit if it cannot disembark its ship’s entire complement 
of  passengers  on  a  single  day.    Consequently,  in  terms  of  the  volume  of  visitors 

disembarking from cruise ships, the likely avoidance of the large vessels will reduce 
passenger visitation volume by a significant percentage, likely north of 80 and possibly as 
high as 90 percent (in the short term) compared with the peak numbers experienced in 2022 
and 2023.                                                                 
Cruise lines with large ships will, necessarily, adjust their itineraries and reroute 
high-berth ships to other ports.  Plaintiffs would likely feel a financial impact occasioned 

by reduced cruise passenger patronage.  The pier and tender boat operators will likely lose 
fees, the APPLL members will likely experience a reduction in business and will perhaps 
close during the shoulder season or retain fewer employees in those months, and the Pilots 
Association will have decisions to make related to maintaining personnel, vessels, and 
equipment without the revenue generated by regular piloting of the largest cruise ships into 

and out of Frenchman Bay.                                                 
Because no ecosystem is static, presumably some cruise lines will adjust practices 
to maximize utilization of the new caps.  However, the record does not contain evidence 
that would allow for a reliable calculation on that score, nor would I expect it to.16  There 
is no evidence to suggest, for example, that the cruise lines with the smaller ships have 


16 The cruise industry stated in 2019 that it “is poised to continue its overall expansion, adding new ships 
faster than retiring them.”  Ex. 32 § 6.  “The demographics of the passengers seeking cruises in a given area 
will largely dictate the size and amenities of vessels.  Vessels should be considered moveable high-value 
assets for generating shareholder profits.  To this end, cruise companies will evaluate the yield achievable 
by a ship assignment in a given market.”  Id.  Conceivably, if, as the cruise lines evidently fear, more 
municipalities impose capacity restrictions, then certain cruise lines will reconsider their decision to focus 
either a sufficient number of ships or that their cruises are in sufficient demand to approach 
the caps on a regular daily basis.  Even if visitation is eventually maximized under the 

Ordinance, the overall number of cruise ship passenger visits would be significantly less 
than the level of visitation experienced in 2022 and 2023 and less than a third of the level 
authorized under the recent MOAs.                                         
                       DISCUSSION                                    
Plaintiffs allege in their Complaint (ECF No. 1) that Bar Harbor’s new Ordinance 
is preempted by operation of the United States Constitution’s Supremacy Clause (Count 

1), violates the Commerce Clause (Count 2), and offends “substantive due process” (Count 
3).  Plaintiff-Intervenors similarly allege in their Complaint-in-Intervention (ECF No. 43) 
that the ordinance violates the Supremacy Clause (Count 1) and the Commerce Clause 
(Count  2),  but  additionally  allege  that  the  ordinance  is  preempted  under  the  Maine 
Constitution based on alleged conflict with Maine’s statutory pilotage system (Count 3) 

and its statutory economic and community development program (Count 4).   
I address the Maine Constitution first before turning to the federal claims. 
A.   The Maine Constitution                                               
The  Maine  Constitution  affords  municipalities  home  rule  authority.    “The 
inhabitants of any municipality shall have the power to alter and amend their charters on 

all matters, not prohibited by Constitution or general law, which are local and municipal in 
character.  The Legislature shall prescribe the procedure by which the municipality may so 
act.”  Me. Const. art. VIII, pt. 2, § 1.  Home rule authority has been conferred on Maine 
municipalities by the Maine Legislature to the maximum extent of the Legislature’s power 
to grant it, excepting only home rule authority that is elsewhere denied expressly or by 
clear  implication  in  Maine  law,  see  30-A  M.R.S.  § 3001,  or  where  “the  municipal 

ordinance in question would frustrate the purpose of any state law,” id. § 3001(3).  When 
the exercise of home rule is challenged, the municipal power authorized under Maine law 
is to be “liberally construed to effect its purposes” and courts must apply a “rebuttable 
presumption that any ordinance . . . is a valid exercise of a municipality’s home rule 
authority.”  Id. § 3001(1), (2).                                          
The Maine Constitution also extends to each Maine municipality the authority to 

provide for their electors to exercise “the direct initiative . . . in regard to its municipal 
affairs.”  Me. Const. art IV, pt. 3, § 21.  The authority of municipal electors (i.e., voters) to 
legislate by means of a direct initiative is coextensive with the authority of the municipality 
to exert its home rule authority.  Portland Reg’l Chamber of Commerce v. City of Portland, 
253 A.3d 586, 592–93 (Me. 2021).  It was thus an exercise of home rule authority when 

the petition committee circulated the initiative that resulted in Bar Harbor’s challenged 
Ordinance.                                                                
Plaintiff-Intervenor does not contend that the petition process and resulting initiative 
exceeded any state or municipal law or rule insofar as the Ordinance’s enactment is 
concerned.  Nor does it contend that the initiative is not an exercise of home rule authority 

involving municipal affairs.  Instead, Plaintiff-Intervenor contends that the Ordinance 
prevents the accomplishment of state priorities articulated in state laws respecting the 
establishment  of  a  system  of  pilotage  and  a  program  of  economic  and  community 
development.  Challenges involving the “implied” prohibition “must be evaluated on a 
case-by-case basis by examining the language of the ordinance and any statutes enacted by 
the Legislature.”  Id. at 593.                                            

In Maine Revised Statutes Title 38 the Maine Legislature has declared a policy and 
purpose “to provide for a system of state pilotage in order to provide maximum safety from 
the dangers of navigation,” “to maintain a state pilotage system devoted to the preservation 
and  protection  of  lives,  property,  the  environment  and  vessels,”  and  “to  insure  the 
availability of pilots”  38 M.R.S. § 85.  The pilotage statute then goes on to define terms, 
outline jurisdiction, specify the vessels that must take pilots, prohibit piloting without a 

license, establish a pilotage commission and outline its duties, and set up a system of 
licensure for pilots.  None of these statutory provisions prohibits a municipality from 
enacting  an  ordinance  that  restricts  local  passage  from  private  piers  onto  municipal 
property.  Nor does the Ordinance conflict with the objective of the Legislature when it 
comes to pilotage.  Pilots remain free to conduct their profession and to pilot vessels within 

the region, including by piloting them to Frenchman Bay anchorages.  Nothing in the 
pilotage statute can reasonably be construed as a legislative intention, express or implied, 
to  divest  municipalities  of  home  rule  authority  over  local,  land-based,  police  power 
concerns whenever the exercise of that authority could foreseeably impact the volume of 
business available to pilots.  The establishment of a pilotage system is not an implicit 

statutory surrogate for compulsory, maximal municipal participation in cruise tourism. 
Plaintiff-Intervenor also argues that Maine’s statutory intention of “formulat[ing] 
and implement[ing] economic development policies and programs” that are coordinated 
among the State’s several agencies and various “municipal and regional economic efforts,” 
5 M.R.S. § 13052, will not tolerate an exercise in municipal home rule that curtails cruise 
tourism.  With the statute in question, the Maine Legislature organized a Department of 

Economic  and  Community  Development.    Id.  §§ 13054,  13055.    The Department  is 
empowered to, among other things, implement policies and programs, work with other 
organization including municipalities, conduct planning and research, communicate with 
the private sector, prepare and distribute publications, and implement programs assigned 
to it by the Governor or Legislature.  Id. § 13056.  The Department’s Office of Tourism is 
empowered to engage in promotional and informational activities, encourage development, 

review and comment activities, and similar activities.  Id. §§ 13090-C, 13090-E.  However, 
it has no power to compel or even regulate municipal engagement with cruise line tourism. 
While  the  Department  and  the  Office  have  rule-making  authority,  Plaintiff-
Intervenor does not rely on any rules to support its preemption claim.  Instead, Plaintiff-
Intervenor  argues  that  any  municipal  action  inconsistent  with  greater  economic 

development  necessarily  prevents  coordination  as  well  as  economic  and  community 
development.  The argument is essentially that through declaration of an economic and 
community development goal and creation of a related department and tourism office, the 
Maine Legislature has imposed a duty on every municipality and political subdivision to 
act in the best interest of the Chamber of Commerce.  Of course, if the maximization of 

commerce were compulsory, a vast body of zoning and land use regulation would not be 
worth the paper it is written on.  To be certain, most municipalities yearn for the types of 
burdens of fortune that Bar Harbor experiences.  The broad and undifferentiated aspiration 
toward commercial health made manifest by the Legislature’s creation of the Office of 
Tourism and CruiseMaine is sensible and one supposes is in league with the desires of most 
municipalities most of the time.  However, the picture of commercial development is not 

painted  in  primary  colors  alone  but  rather  exists  in  a  pastiche  of  other  municipal 
considerations.  A municipality that rationally exercises its home rule authority in a manner 
which is modestly in tension with the highest marginal commercial harvest, the type which 
is the sine qua non of the tourism office, is not an outlaw.              
The  fact  is  that  the  Legislature  has  not  empowered  these  instrumentalities  to 
override municipal home rule authority.  The Legislature has not even empowered these 

instrumentalities to wield the interstitial power of a special master or an ombudsman in 
matters of municipal and cruise line conflict.  If it had, then some manner of administrative 
process would have preceded before or alongside this litigation.  Yes, CruiseMaine may 
support, educate, promote, and play the part of a sales broker when it comes to cruise 
tourism, but decidedly missing from the enumerated powers is the power to trump home 

rule authority to dictate acceptable levels of municipal participation in cruise tourism.   
Nor  can  the  mere  existence  of  the  Department  or  its  tourism-focused 
instrumentalities  be  regarded  as  an  implied  prohibition  against  a  local  municipal 
determination to reduce engagement with the cruise line industry.  Public bodies may 
exercise only the powers conferred upon them by law.  The conferral of powers must be 

found “in the enabling statute either expressly or by necessary inference as an incidence 
essential to the full exercise of powers specifically granted.”  Hallissey v. Sch. Admin. Dist. 
No. 77, 755 A.2d 1068, 1072 (Me. 2000).  The derogation of home rule authority must rest 
on  something  more  immediate  and  direct  than  the  Legislature’s  pro-commerce 
proclamations and the institution of a body tasked with broadly supporting and promoting, 
but not regulating, tourism.  If home rule authority is to be overcome it ought to be based 

on something with a little more starch, such as the text of the law.  As is so often the case, 
when textual (i.e., legal) support for a challenge to home rule authority is lacking, an 
invitation is made to the court to begin at the intellectual equivalent of divining legislative 
intent from high upon the pillars, which is to say, an appeal toward sophistry.  To be certain, 
for some there is an intoxicating appeal to wielding such authority, acting as a sort of 
judicial “God of the gaps” and the line is long of those only too eager to cast their light 

upon the unwashed masses to shepherd us through the darkness left by the democratic 
process.  For ease of analysis, this case does not present a close call of implied prohibition 
of home rule.  Any argument of implied prohibition of municipal home rule authority must 
be attended by a particularly muscular example of how the purpose of the enabling 
legislation  is  at  cross  purposes  with  the home  rule.   The  analysis cannot  be one  of 

contingencies or at least if it is, must ultimately be tethered to the noncontingent, a prime 
mover example in the law that demonstrates how home rule errs.            
The Legislature should not be viewed as having impliedly prohibited the exercise 
of municipal home rule authority in an area that the Legislature has not even attempted to 
regulate in any direct manner.  Even in areas that the Legislature has regulated directly, 

municipal home rule authority is not so easily preempted.  See, e.g., Portland Reg’l 
Chamber,  253  A.3d  at  591  (upholding  Portland’s  minimum  wage  ordinance  despite 
existence of state minimum wage statute); Portland Pipe Line Corp. v. City of S. Portland, 
240 A.3d 364, 368 (Me. 2020) (holding that Maine Coastal Conveyance Act, which 
involved the State’s exercise of police power in matters of oil transfers, did not preempt a 
local  ordinance  that  prohibited  an  activity  even  though  the  Maine  Department  of 

Environmental Protection (“DEP”) had issued an approval that allowed for but did not 
require the activity in question); E. Perry Iron & Metal Co., Inc. v. City of Portland, 941 
A.2d 457, 463 (Me. 2008) (upholding municipal regulation of junkyard in absence of 
evidence that it frustrated the purposes of Maine’s Solid Waste Act); Smith v. Town of 
Pittston, 820 A.2d 1200, 1201 (Me. 2003) (4-3) (upholding municipal ordinance banning 
the spread of septage in the Town of Pittston despite existence of DEP rules establishing 

minimal performance criteria for such spreading, DEP’s award of permit application to 
conduct such spreading, and legislative intent to encourage development of affordable, 
environmentally suitable waste disposal sites).  When it comes to the growth of tourism in 
Maine there simply is no state-sanctioned regulatory scheme to frustrate, only a broadly 
worded  aspirational  objective  of  regional  economic  coordination  and  an  associated 

initiative of the Office of Tourism to support, educate, and promote cruise communities. 
Plaintiff-Intervenor’s  claims  of  preemption  under  the  Maine  Constitution 
(Complaint in Intervention Counts 3 and 4) fail.                          
B.   The United States Constitution                                       
Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor mount challenges to Bar Harbor’s Ordinance 

based on the Supremacy Clause and the Commerce Clause.  Pls.’ Compl. Counts 1–2; 
Compl. in Intervention Counts 1–2.  Plaintiffs add a claim under the Due Process Clause.  
Pls.’ Compl. Count 3.  I begin my review with the Supremacy Clause, move on to the Due 
Process Clause, and finish with the Commerce Clause.                      
1.   The Supremacy Clause                                            
The Supremacy Clause provides that “the Laws of the United States . . . and all 

Treaties made . . . under the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of 
the  Land;  and  the  Judges  in  every  State  shall  be  bound  thereby,  any  Thing  in  the 
Constitution or Laws of any state to the Contrary notwithstanding.”  U.S. Const. art. VI, 
cl. 2.  Due to the Supremacy Clause, when Congress enacts a statute, state law is preempted 
to the extent of any conflict with the federal statute.  Haaland v. Brackeen, 599 U.S. 255, 
287 (2023).  Sometimes a federal statute will expressly preempt state law, but preemption 

also can arise “by virtue of restrictions or rights that are inferred from statutory law.”  
Kansas v. Garcia, 140 S. Ct. 791, 801 (2020).  Preemption can result, for example, based 
on the inference that Congress has effectively occupied the field in a certain area of 
regulation even though Congress has not announced a preemptive intention.  City of 
Burbank v. Lockheed Air Terminal Inc., 411 U.S. 624, 633 (1973).  Preemption can also 

result based on the existence of competing commands, allowances, or standards in federal 
and state law.  “If federal law ‘imposes restrictions or confers rights on private actors’ and 
‘a state law confers rights or imposes restrictions that conflict with the federal law,’ ‘the 
federal law takes precedence and the state law is preempted.’”  Garcia, 140 S. Ct. at 801 
(quoting Murphy v. National Collegiate Athletic Assn., 138 S. Ct. 1461, 1480 (2018)).  

However, “[i]nvoking some brooding federal interest or appealing to a judicial policy 
preference should never be enough to win preemption of a state law.”  Virginia Uranium, 
Inc. v. Warren, 139 S. Ct. 1894, 1901 (2019).                             
“‘[T]he basic question involved in [Supremacy Clause] cases . . . is never one of 
interpretation of the Federal Constitution but inevitably one of comparing two statutes.”  
Swift & Co. v. Wickham, 382 U.S. 111, 120 (1965).  “[F]or the purposes of the Supremacy 

Clause, the constitutionality of local ordinances is analyzed in the same way as that of 
statewide laws.”  Hillsborough Cnty., Fla. v. Automated Med. Laboratories, Inc., 471 U.S. 
707, 713 (1985).                                                          
     a.  Federal regulation of maritime matters                      
Plaintiffs point to the many ways in which federal law applies to vessels, seafarers, 
and ports or “maritime terminal facilities” to argue that there is no room for a municipality 

to restrict shore access via port facilities.  The cited federal law, rules, and regulations, 
however,  do  nothing  to  legislate  in  the  area  of  cruise  tourism  (or  even—with  one 
exception—landward  passage).    Plaintiffs  cite  the  Federal  Maritime  Transportation 
Security Act, 46 U.S.C. §§ 70101-70132, which governs “port security,” and the entire 
Coast Guard Authorization Act, Pub. L. 111-281, 124 Stat. 2905 (Oct. 15, 2010), which as 

the title suggests authorizes appropriations for the Coast Guard.  Bar Harbor’s Ordinance 
clearly does not compete with federal law in the area of port security or Coast Guard 
operations.17                                                             
Plaintiff-Intervenor advances similar preemption arguments to those pressed by 
Plaintiffs but shifts the focus slightly to contemplate the regulatory burdens imposed on 


17 In Plaintiffs’ rundown of federal law touching on vessels and maritime facilities, they cite 33 C.F.R. 
§ 105.105(a)(2) for the proposition that Coast Guard regulations under the Maritime Transportation 
Security Act are intended to be preemptive.  Pls.’ Br. at 20.  The reference is perplexing because it merely 
states that the requirements of maritime security for facilities apply to the owner or operator of a facility 
that receives vessels certified to carry more than 150 passengers, yet Plaintiffs have elsewhere informed the 
Court that the tender vessels are licensed to hold 149 passengers.  In any event, clearly the Bar Harbor 
cruise lines and pilots.  The Pilots Association argues that because “[t]he federal presence 
in the area of navigation, safety, and environmental protection is extensive, pervasive, 

demanding, and complex,” and “follows a vessel from its design phase through its ultimate 
scrapping,” and “link[s with] a series of international agreements dependent upon the 
predictability of access to ports,” and involves oversight by the Coast Guard, Customs and 
Border Protection, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Environmental 
Protection Agency, and the Federal Maritime Commission, “[l]ocal restrictions on vessel 
operations . . . pose a direct threat to the necessary uniformity of federal oversight and the 

efficient operation of cruise . . . vessels.”  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 9–10 (ECF No. 190).  This 
language checks off the lawyerly rhetoric box but fails to tease out any actual conflict.  The 
Ordinance simply does not purport to regulate vessel requirements or make the operation 
or navigation of cruise vessels any less safe, environmentally sound, or efficient.  Nor does 
it interfere in any way with the performance of cruise line oversight by the Coast Guard, 

CBP, CDC, EPA, or the FMC.  Nor can it be said that any one of the identified agencies 
has  attempted  to  occupy  the  regulatory  field  when  it  comes to  balancing competing 
interests related to a municipality’s participation in cruise tourism.  Federal regulation in 
this arena is not even extant, let alone pervasive.  City of Burbank v. Lockheed Air Terminal 
Inc., 411 U.S. 624, 633 (1973) (“It is the pervasive nature of the scheme of federal 

regulation of aircraft noise that leads us to conclude that there is pre-emption.”). 
Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor’s invocation of all the many ways that federal law 
touches upon maritime traffic is precisely the kind of “brooding federal interest” mentioned 
in Hillsborough, 471 U.S. at 713.  As such, it does not suffice to support the preemption of 
Bar Harbor’s disembarkation restriction.18                                
     b.  Seafarer shore access                                       

When  Plaintiffs  and  Plaintiff-Intervenors  do  dive  down  into  the  maritime 
regulations to retrieve something specific, the palatable19 oyster they surface with is a 
preemptive maritime security regulation that requires the owners or operators of maritime 
facilities (such as Plaintiff Pier Owners) to ensure shore access for seafarers who wish to 
transit from a vessel through or over regulated facilities.  33 C.F.R. § 105.237.20 

(a) Access required.  Each facility owner or operator must implement a 
system . . . for providing access through the facility that enables individuals 
to transit to and from a vessel moored at the facility and the facility gate in 
accordance with the requirements in this section.  The system must provide 
timely access as described in paragraph (c) of this section and incorporate 
the access methods described in paragraph (d) of this section at no cost to the 
individuals covered.                                                 

(b) Individuals covered.  The individuals to whom the facility owner or 
operator must provide the access described in this section include—  


18 Plaintiffs muse in their post-trial brief that the Ordinance is unenforceable because the Pier Owners lack 
the authority to stop or turn back cruise ship passengers who arrive at the pier.  Pls.’ Br. at 31 n.27 (also 
noting that this point is “not part of this legal challenge”).  The idea that the Pier Owners cannot lawfully 
comply ignores the reality that cruise ship passengers (and crew) arrive at the piers pursuant to a prearranged 
reservation system and have long done so with the understanding that a free-for-all would result in chaos 
and passenger dissatisfaction with the shoreside experience.  Besides, compliance should present no 
difficulty as we are assured by Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor that oversized cruise ships will no longer 
call at Bar Harbor.                                                       

19 Plaintiff-Intervenor also cites 33 U.S.C. § 5, which prohibits the levying of tolls “or any other impositions 
whatever,” upon vessels, water craft, or their passengers or crew, by “any non-Federal interest, if the vessel 
or water craft is operating on any navigable waters subject to the authority of the United States.”  Pl.-Int.’s 
Reply Br. at 12.  This oyster has spoiled.  The argument is waived for purposes of this litigation since it 
was first raised in a reply brief.  But in any event, the Ordinance is designed to prevent excessive 
disembarkations from cruise ships, subject to a fine imposed against the pier owner to ensure compliance.  
It is not a toll, fee, or other imposition directed toward cruise ships or their passengers and crew associated 
with their use or enjoyment of navigable waters.                          

20 The regulations provide that part 105 has preemptive effect “insofar as a State or local law or regulation 
applicable to the facilities . . . would conflict with the regulations in part 105, either by actually conflicting 
     (1) Seafarers assigned to a vessel at that facility;            

     (2) Pilots; and                                                 

     (3) Representatives of seafarers’ welfare and labor organizations. 

Id. § 105.237.  Cruise ship passengers are not seafarers.  Seafarers are persons “assigned 
to a vessel” (i.e., crew) or “pilots” or “[r]epresentatives of seafarers’ welfare and labor 
organizations.”    Id.  § 105.237(b);  see  also  id.  § 96.250(f)(4)  (providing  that  safety 
management systems include personnel procedures ensuring that “[e]ach vessel is properly 
crewed with qualified, certificated and medically fit seafarers”).        
Because the Bar Harbor Ordinance is drawn as a restriction on the numbers of 
“persons” and not just “passengers” who may be disembarked on or over municipal land, 
Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor proclaim a victory.  I agree with Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-
Intervenor (and evidently with Defendant and Defendant-Intervenor) that the Ordinance 
cannot stand as a barrier to seafarers’ shore access when a seafarer is assigned to a vessel 
moored at either pier facility owned by the Plaintiff Pier Owners.  To the extent the 
Ordinance might be read to require a different conclusion, it cannot be enforced.  However, 
it does not follow that the entire Ordinance is invalidated or that any meaningful relief is 
to be awarded in this litigation as a result of the limited (and hypothetical) preemption 
occasioned by the seafarers’ access regulation.                           

The scope of preemption “is guided by the rule that the purpose of Congress is the 
ultimate touchstone in every pre-emption case.”  Altria Group, Inc. v. Good, 555 U.S. 70, 
76 (2008) (cleaned up).  “That approach is consistent with both federalism concerns and 
the historic primacy of state regulation of matters of health and safety.”  Medtronic, Inc. v. 
Lohr, 518 U.S. 470, 485 (1996); see also Consumer Data Indus. Ass’n v. Frey, 26 F.4th 1, 
12 (1st Cir. 2022) (remanding for district court to analyze the scope of a federal law’s 

preemptive impact), cert. denied, 143 S. Ct. 777 (2023).  Here, the purpose of the federal 
regulation is to assure seafarer access to shore when seafarers are aboard and assigned to a 
vessel moored at the regulated facility.  Consequently, the preemptive reach of the federal 
seafarers’ access regulation extends no farther than to a controversy involving an attempt 
by Bar Harbor to deny shore access to a seafarer on a vessel moored at either facility. 
This case does not present any actual controversy of that (or any other actual) kind.  

Moreover, even if the conflict preemption associated with the seafarers’ access regulation 
is appropriately resolved in the context of this litigation, it would not achieve the result that 
Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor seek, which is total invalidation of the Ordinance.  A 
limited invalidation of the Ordinance for purposes of seafarers’ access would not render 
the Ordinance an ineffective instrument to impose a disembarkation cap against cruise ship 

passengers, since passengers are not seafarers.                           
Plaintiffs  and  Plaintiff-Intervenor  insist  nonetheless  that  invalidation  of  the 
Ordinance based on its use of the word “persons” instead of “passengers” should be total.  
I digress to address this assertion, though it is unavailing.  The genesis of the digression is 
the fact that Bar Harbor has indicated that it will author a rule that limits the Ordinance by 

recognizing an exception for shore access for seafarers.  When a state, municipality or local 
agency interprets or enforces a law in a manner that avoids a conflict with federal law, 
ordinarily mere facial constitutional challenges are effectively deflected.  Wash. State 
Grange v. Wash. State Republican Party, 552 U.S. 442, 456 (2008); Ward v. Rock Against 
Racism, 491 U.S. 781, 795–96 (1989); McGuire v. Reilly, 386 F.3d 45, 58 (1st Cir. 2004).  
However, here the Ordinance’s use of “persons” unambiguously extends to seafarers, so it 

is “not readily susceptible to a narrowing construction.”  Rhode Island Ass’n of Realtors, 
Inc. v. Whitehouse, 199 F.3d 26, 35 (1st Cir. 1999).                      
Plaintiffs also cite Maine Supreme Judicial Court opinions that they say preclude 
efforts  by  a  municipality  to  confine  the  reach  of  a  citizen  initiative  by  means  of  a 
rulemaking process.  They contend that the only available fix requires an initiative and 
election do-over.  The cases Plaintiffs cite do not support the proposition.  See Wawenock, 

LLC v. Dep’t of Transp., 187 A.3d 609, 618 (Me. 2018) (discussing methods of interpreting 
the “will of the people” when construing citizen initiatives); Davis v. SBA Towers II, LLC, 
979 A.2d 86, 92–93 (Me. 2008) (“Although Gridcom argues that the Planning Board’s 
decision to redefine the term was also procedurally improper, we need not address this 
claim.”).  And while Plaintiffs correctly observe that Maine law requires that an ordinance 

be revised “only by following the procedure required for its original enactment,” 30-A 
M.R.S. § 3004(4), it does not compel that an ordinance be invalidated in toto based on a 
limited conflict with federal law.  The default rule of constitutional jurisprudence is to the 
contrary, and here it takes little imagination to appreciate that the voters of Bar Harbor 
intended and would prefer that the Ordinance remain operative as to passengers rather than 

be invalidated as to passengers.  See Town of Windham v. LaPointe, 308 A.2d 286, 292 
(Me. 1973); see also Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of N. New England, 546 U.S. 320, 329–
30 (2006).                                                                
In summary, yes, the Ordinance has the potential to conflict with the preemptive 
seafarers’ access regulation and requires that Bar Harbor avoid any application of the 
Ordinance that would run afoul of 33 C.F.R. § 105.237.  However, the limited conceptual 

conflict does not achieve the result that Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor are after, which 
is total invalidation of the Ordinance.21                                 
     c.  Customs and immigration                                     
Plaintiff-Intervenor  also  argues  that  the  Ordinance  “obstructs  customs  and 
immigration screening of entrants to the United States.”  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 14.  The idea is 
that cruise itineraries in the North Atlantic often include calls in Canadian ports before 

returning to U.S. waters, so if the first port of call in the U.S. chosen by the cruise ship’s 
captain is Bar Harbor, then Bar Harbor must permit unrestricted disembarkation from the 
cruise ship as a logical consequence of any immigration and customs inspection that 
transpires aboard the ship while it is anchored in Frenchman Bay.         
The conflict is imagined, not real.  The Ordinance does not prohibit or otherwise 

prevent entry to the United States.  Anyone admitted to the United States by CPB through 
a process that transpires aboard ship in Frenchman Bay may enter the United States, 
including in Bar Harbor.  The Ordinance does not impose an additional condition for 
admission or otherwise purport to supply a basis for exclusion from the United States, it 

21 Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor fail to articulate a set of circumstances in which an as-applied challenge 
by a seafarer necessarily would arise and hypothetical notions about what might transpire do not suffice 
since “litigants mounting a facial challenge to a statute normally ‘must establish that no set of circumstances 
exists under which the [statute] would be valid.’”  United States v. Hansen, 599 U.S. 762, 769 (2023) 
(quoting United States v. Salerno, 481 U.S. 739, 745 (1987), and discussing the exception for overbroad 
restraints on free speech)).  Assuming reservations are booked and tendering arrangements are made such 
that a combined total of more than 1,000 passengers and seafarers would be disembarked on a given day, 
further constitutional litigation based on the preemptive force of 33 C.F.R. § 105.237 is susceptible to 
avoidance when the Court is assured that the handling of any such scenario will be addressed in advance 
by the Town’s rulemaking process in recognition of the partial preemption of the Ordinance.  The facial 
imposes  only  a  limitation  on  local  disembarkations  and  a  fine  for  excessive 
disembarkations,  regardless  of  the  admission  status  of  persons  disembarked.22  

Nevertheless, Plaintiff-Intervenor likens this case to Takashi v. Fish & Game Commission, 
334 U.S. 410 (1948), and Maine Forest Products Council v. Cormier, 586 F. Supp. 3d 22 
(D. Me. 2022).  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 14–16.  This case is unlike either.     
In Takashi, the Supreme Court invalidated, on a variety of grounds, a discriminatory 
California law that banned lawful residents ineligible for citizenship from engaging in 
commercial fishing.  334 U.S. at 413–415, 422.  Plaintiff-Intervenor says the Ordinance 

similarly discriminates.  The discrimination argument relies on the fact that the largest 
cruise ships are all foreign-flagged vessels and the fact that all cruise ships customarily 
carry passengers who are foreign nationals.  However, the Ordinance is not drawn in 
discriminatory language and nothing that transpired at trial betrayed a discriminatory 
purpose to exclude foreign-flagged vessels or the citizens of other nations.  The Ordinance 

is drawn with the passenger capacity of ships in mind, not the nationality of the ships’ 
owners or passengers.                                                     
In  Cormier,  Judge  Woodcock  issued  a  preliminary  injunction  enjoining 
enforcement of a protectionist state statute designed to prevent foreign workers from 


22 It bears repeating that cruise ships with passenger capacities in excess of 1,000 will likely not have Bar 
Harbor on their itineraries.  Visitation at a port is arranged many months in advance, with local, daily 
passenger caps in mind.  Consequently, the imagined conflict between an admission decision and a refusal 
to allow disembarkation (or imposition of a fine on the Pier Owners for excessive disembarkations) is 
entirely at odds with the actual practices long observed in Bar Harbor in relation to pre-scheduled port calls.  
Plaintiff-Intervenor also neglected to call an expert witness to substantiate its hypothetical customs scenario 
of a cruise ship returning from foreign waters intent on making an appointment with CPB in Frenchman 
Bay as a means of forcing an unreserved port call in Bar Harbor (assuming CBP would even condone such 
engaging in the intrastate transportation of forest products.  There, the federal regulatory 
regime for alien work visas resulted in the issuance of work visas for the performance of 

specific jobs identified as part of a certification process and based on the Department of 
Labor’s specific findings that domestic workers were not available in sufficient numbers 
and  employment  of  the  aliens  would  not  negatively  impact  local  wages  and  work 
conditions.  Id. at 39–41 & n.12.  In that context, the federal government’s occupation of 
the field of foreign worker authorization was manifest, as was the conflict between the 
Maine act and federal law.  Id. at 46.  That is not the situation in this case.  There is no 

evidence in this case or cited law demonstrating that cruise lines obtain advance federal 
authorization to  disembark their entire complement of passengers specifically in  Bar 
Harbor.  Cruise lines present their passengers for inspection when they arrive at the Class 
A port designated on their own itineraries.  Cruise lines are not required by federal law to 
apply for preauthorization to call at a particular port, let alone to disembark every passenger 

upon arrival.  Nor does CPB make specific findings based on any federal law or regulation 
that cruise line passengers may disembark in any particular location in any particular 
numbers based on the cruise ship’s passenger capacity and local conditions. 
Plaintiff-Intervenor’s customs- and immigration-based arguments for preemption 
fail to make way.                                                         

     d.  Anchorages                                                  
Finally, Plaintiff-Intervenor argues that because the Secretary of Homeland Security 
has established federal anchorages in Frenchman Bay for purposes of safe navigation, see 
46  U.S.C.  § 70006;  33  C.F.R.  § 110.130,  the  Ordinance’s  regulation  of  onshore 
disembarkation is preempted since large cruise ships with North Atlantic itineraries will 
otherwise have rare occasion to use the anchorages.  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 17–18.  This final 

Supremacy Clause challenge is like the others.  It fails to support an inference of federal 
field preemption expansive enough to blockade local regulation in matters of cruise line 
passenger shore access.  It also fails to expose any actual conflict between federal and state 
law as the Ordinance imposes no restriction whatsoever on Frenchman Bay anchorage 
access.  Cruise ships of whatever size are free to anchor in Frenchman Bay.  If cruise lines 
chose not to anchor in Frenchman Bay because of the Ordinance, that is a function of the 

cruise lines’ own cost and benefit calculations.  By the mere act of establishing anchorages 
the Secretary of Homeland Security has not conferred a charter of privileges on cruise lines 
to disembark their entire complement of passengers in any municipality in which there are 
pier  operators  who  would  welcome  them.    Like  the  other  shots  fired  in  Plaintiff-
Intervenor’s Supremacy Clause fusillade, the final shot fails to sink the Ordinance. 

2.   The Due Process Clause                                          
Plaintiffs, but not Plaintiff-Intervenor, claim that the Ordinance offends the Due 
Process Clause.  The Fourteenth Amendment prohibits the States from “depriv[ing] any 
person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law.”  U.S. Const. amend. XIV.  
Around the dawn of the Twentieth Century—an era sometimes described as the “Lochner 

era” by Supreme Court historians—the Supreme Court instilled in the Due Process Clause 
substantive overtones based on a natural-law preoccupation with the freedom to contract.  
Essentially,  if  two  parties  were  willing  to  engage  in  a  commercial  relationship,  an 
expression of their individual liberty, what should stand in their way or interfere with their 
decisions about how to structure the relationship?  According to the Court, not the majority 
of their peers acting through their elected representatives.  See, e.g., Allgeyer v. Louisiana, 

165 U.S. 578 (1897) (invalidating a law regulating marine insurance); Lochner v. New 
York, 198 U.S. 45 (1905) (invalidating a labor law designed to limit the hours worked by 
bakers); Adkins v. Children’s Hosp. of the D.C., 261 U.S. 525 (1923) (invalidating a law 
establishing a board and an investigative and consultative process to establish minimum 
wages for women).                                                         
When we speak of the Lochner Era’s substantive due process jurisprudence today, 

it is mostly to express bewilderment that the Court engaged in such a freehanded practice 
of  judicial  policymaking  in  favor  of  those  having  commercial  advantage  in  the 
marketplace, or else to extol the noteworthy dissents of the era, such as the work of Justice 
Oliver Wendell Holmes in Lochner and the work of Justice Holmes and Chief Justice 
William Howard Taft in Adkins.  It reminds us, and is worthy of perennial reminding, that 

judicial policymaking is an insidious, antidemocratic, and narcissistic instinct still very 
much alive that must be resisted.  Lessons from the Lochner-era season of judicial mischief 
making that are worthy of mention include the observance that “[t]he 14th Amendment 
does not enact Mr. Herbert Spencer’s Social Statics,” Lochner, 198 U.S. at 75; that a court 
should avoid “pricking out a line in successive cases” when the process is akin to legislative 

policymaking,  Adkins,  261  U.S.  at  562  (Taft,  C.J.,  dissenting);  that  the  substantive 
“contours” of the Due Process Clause are decidedly “vague” in relation to the freedom to 
contract, id. at 568 (Holmes, J., dissenting); that when it comes to liberty “pretty much all 
law consists in forbidding men to do some things that they want to do,” id.; and that 
deciding whether a law’s benefits are worth its costs is a matter assigned to the legislative 
rather than the judicial branch of government, id. at 571.                

When the Supreme Court finally abandoned using the freedom to contract as an 
antidemocratic talisman, it reaffirmed what a great many of its other decisions had long 
established, summing up the concern over individual liberty as follows:   
[F]reedom of contract is a qualified, and not an absolute, right.  There is no 
absolute freedom to do as one will or to contract as one chooses.  The 
guarantee of liberty does not withdraw from legislative supervision that wide 
department of activity which consists of the making of contracts, or deny to 
the government the power to provide restrictive safeguards.  Liberty implies 
the absence of arbitrary restraint, not immunity from reasonable regulation 
and prohibitions imposed in the interest of the community.           

W. Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish, 300 U.S. 379, 392 (1937).                  
And so it comes as something of a surprise that I now consider a due process 
challenge to the Bar Harbor Ordinance that pits the Plaintiffs’ freedom to contract23 against 
restrictions imposed in the interest of the community.  But to their credit, Plaintiffs do not 
come right out and say it.  Instead, they adopt the language of modern due process 
standards, contending that there is no “rational nexus” between the Ordinance’s “purpose 
and standards and the processes . . . employe[ed] to achieve [them].”  Pls.’ Br. at 52 (ECF 
No. 191) (citing Pennell v. City of San Jose, 485 U.S. 1, 11 (1988) (upholding municipal 
rent control ordinance over a due process challenge)).                    
When it comes to the evaluation of the existence of a rational nexus, “courts should 

23 Plaintiffs have also asserted that the Ordinance unlawfully restrains the non-party cruise lines’ and their 
passengers’ right to travel.  Presumably the freedom to travel is no more sacrosanct than the freedom to 
contract.  I can see no reasons why natural law would elevate one over the other.  Plaintiffs did not assert 
that the Ordinance violates individuals’ right to travel in their complaint; instead, they raised this issue for 
the first time in their post-trial brief in a perfunctory fashion.  Consequently, I do not consider the freedom 
refrain from substituting their regulatory wisdom for that of the legislature.  Vaqueria Tres 
Monjitas, Inc. v. Irizarry, 587 F.3d 464, 483 (1st Cir. 2009).  “[A] court’s Due Process 

inquiry should be satisfied ‘[i]f the laws passed are seen to have a reasonable relation to a 
proper legislative purpose, and are neither arbitrary nor discriminatory.’”  Id. (quoting 
Nebbia v. New York, 291 U.S. 502, 537 (1934)).  “This inquiry should focus on whether a 
program’s  procedures  are  inadequate  or  whether,  overall,  a  program  is  arbitrary, 
discriminatory or irrelevant to a legitimate legislative goal.”  Id. (internal quotation marks 
omitted).                                                                 

Plaintiffs argue that the Ordinance defies the rational nexus requirement because it 
imposes a strict limit of 1,000 persons per day “for every single day of the year,” without 
accounting for seasonal variation in the congestion experienced in Bar Harbor as the result 
of tourism.  Pls.’ Br. at 53.  In support of their position, Plaintiffs emphasize that Mr. 
Sidman testified that the fixed restriction to 1,000 persons daily was not the product of “a 

rigorously defensible finding or study or calculation,” July 13 Tr. at 312:20–21, and that 
his group “just didn’t want to get into various limits at different times of the year.”  Id. at 
313:24–25.                                                                
Plaintiffs’ argument is that because Bar Harbor long employed different summer-
season and shoulder-season caps it is now irrational for Bar Harbor to do otherwise.  I am 

not convinced that adopting this rationale would be any different than imposing by judicial 
fiat the rule that a fixed cap is unwise policy and therefore unconstitutional because it fails 
to maximize tourism—because, in effect, it is my opinion or another judge’s opinion that 
the Ordinance’s local benefits are not worth their costs.  That might as well be said about 
fixing a minimum wage or imposing rent control.  It is of course rational to propose that 
passenger caps rise and fall inversely to land-based tourism, but it does not follow that a 
fixed cap is therefore irrational.24  The Constitution “is made for people of fundamentally 

differing views, and the accident of our finding certain opinions natural and familiar, or 
novel,  and  even  shocking,  ought  not  to  conclude  our  judgment  upon  the  question.”  
Lochner, 198 U.S. at 75–76 (1905) (Holmes, J., dissenting).  The Due Process Clause does 
not compel Bar Harbor to eliminate visitation lulls during the shoulder season by means of 
increased cruise ship visitation.  Nor, to my knowledge, does the Due Process Clause forbid 

municipalities  from  enacting  ordinances  that  have  the  effect  of  preserving  seasonal 
fluctuations in the blessings and burdens of tourism.  Though Plaintiffs evidently see it as 
their constitutional right to maximize the burden that their commercial activity imposes on 
the commons, at least up to a level that approaches their capacity to serve, they have not 
cited any authority for that proposition.                                 

The Ordinance’s 1,000-person daily cap reduces the profit that can be achieved from 
commercial engagement with cruise lines and cruise ship passengers, but it also preserves 
that engagement to a degree.  Is it irrational for the citizens of Bar Harbor to desire a 
passenger cap that enhances their own relative enjoyment of their community during the 
summer and shoulder seasons while maintaining a measure of cruise tourism commerce?  

I cannot say that it is.  If I were to conclude otherwise, I would simply be ratifying the 


24 I am not concerned here with the alleged irrationality of a “year-round” cap because this case does not 
involve year-round cruise ship traffic.  When the Ordinance came into being, the MOAs between the Town 
and the cruise lines involved a season beginning in May and ending in October.  The cruise lines have 
Plaintiffs’ policy preference as being in league with my own, not because the Ordinance is 
discordant with the Due Process Clause.  I adhere to an antiquated notion that judges should 

not allow robes to suffocate a sense of judicial humility by steering wildly outside their 
lane into the role delegated to elected representatives.  Whether the Ordinance is the wisest 
expression of democratic will is a question for which the Constitution does not hold the 
answer.  What may seem like a sensible policy today may strike voters as needing some 
renovation down the road.  This is merely a Schoolhouse Rock-level civics lesson that 
nevertheless bears repeating in constitutional challenges that more appear to challenge the 

marginal wisdom of the law than satisfy the more capacious test of whether it offends the 
Constitution.  Even if I were equipped to play the role of the Oracle of Delphi to answer 
the question of whether the Ordinance is sensible, which I am not, that is not the role 
assigned to me by the Constitution, contemporary trends notwithstanding.  
Plaintiffs argue that it is discriminatory that the amelioration of congestion falls 

exclusively on them, without imposing restrictions on other accommodations or tourists 
who contribute to the problem.  Based on my review of the record, I am not persuaded that 
the Ordinance discriminates in an irrational manner.  Congestion in Bar Harbor is real and 
is experienced throughout the summer and fall months.  When the Pier Owners and Tender 
LLCs disembark several thousand persons on a daily basis, they substantially burden Bar 

Harbor’s waterfront and intensify the experience of congestion more widely. 
Cruise line passenger traffic stands out as worthy of special consideration for a 
variety of reasons.  For purposes of this context, among these reasons are the industry’s 
own longstanding selective and voluntary approach to municipal engagement and its 
acknowledged need for management by means of a reservation system that employs caps.  
Land-based  tourism  is  not  equally  amenable  to  management  and  Plaintiffs  have  not 

suggested any ready means of stemming that particular stream of visitation.  Cruise-based 
tourism is also unlike land-based tourism in that cruise ships carry passengers in numbers 
quite unlike any land-based conveyance.  While cruise lines evidently consider local 
conditions in terms of the capacity of the area to provide their passengers with goods and 
services, they are not deterred by local “no vacancy” conditions that would deter land-
based visitors.  Upon arrival, cruise line passengers congregate in volume, in relatively 

intense morning and afternoon waves, though they also enhance congestion throughout the 
day.  When they arrive, they are joined by a caravan of the vehicles that cater to them, 
congesting the waterfront area with buses, minibuses, vans, motor coaches, and taxis.  
Their  arrival  demands  significant  attention  by  municipal  authorities,  mostly  law 
enforcement personnel hired to manage the press of people and conveyances.  Cruise lines 

also have the relatively unique ability to transform the shoulder season, calling in Bar 
Harbor on a near daily basis in especially large cruise ships.  These are distinct features of 
cruise tourism in Bar Harbor that make differential treatment rational.   
Ultimately, the costs and benefits of the various features of cruise tourism and the 
1000-person daily passenger cap do not boil down to a neat finding of arbitrariness, 

irrationality, irrelevance, or discrimination.  A rational voter could take these features into 
consideration  and  conclude  that  a  1,000-passenger  cap  is  an  appropriate  means  of 
recalibrating the Town’s approach to this very local concern.             
3.   The Commerce Clause                                             
Among the powers the Constitution vests in Congress is the power “[t]o regulate 

Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes.”  
U.S. Const. art I, § 8.  The conferral upon Congress of the power to regulate commerce 
clearly authorizes Congress to override competing regulations adopted by the states, but it 
also acts as a bulwark against state and local regulations that would, if permitted to stand, 
either discriminate against foreign and interstate commerce for local protectionist purposes 
or produce a Balkanized system in which commerce among the states and with other 

nations is overburdened by a need to satisfy multifarious regulations imposed by different 
states on the very same commercial activity.  Camps Newfound/Owatonna, Inc. v. Town of 
Harrison, Me., 520 U.S. 564, 571, 576–77 (1997) (concerning discriminatory regulation); 
Bibb v. Navajo Freight Lines, Inc., 359 U.S. 520, 523–530 (1959) (concerning regulation 
inimical  to  the  orderly  movement  of  good  across  state  lines).    The  bulwark  against 

pernicious regulation is varyingly described as the “dormant” Commerce Clause or the 
“negative command” of the Commerce Clause.  Nat’l Pork Producers Council v. Ross, 598 
U.S. 356, 368 (2023).  Judicial decisions discussing the dormant Commerce Clause are 
legion and not all of the precedent fits neatly into the categories outlined above. 
Plaintiff-Intervenor  breaks  its  argument  into  three  overarching  assertions  with 

subparts.  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 18–44.  The first contention is that the Bar Harbor Ordinance is 
protectionist and discriminatory.  Id. at 22–38.  The second contention is that the burdens 
of the Ordinance far exceed the local benefits.  Id. at 38–43.  The third is that the Ordinance 
violates the Foreign Commerce Clause.  Id. at 43–44.  Plaintiffs, on the other hand, advance 
their position under twelve headings, three of which are prefatory.  Pls.’ Br. at 22–52.  The 
resulting nine arguments cover a similar range of subjects and bounce back and forth 

thematically.  I address Plaintiff-Intervenor’s and Plaintiffs’ arguments together but impose 
my own outline.                                                           
     a.  Discrimination against foreign commerce                     
“‘[T]he’ Commerce Clause is really three distinct Clauses rolled into one: a Foreign 
Commerce Clause, an Interstate Commerce Clause, and an Indian Commerce Clause.”  
Haaland v. Brackeen, 599 U.S. 255, 320 (2023) (Gorsuch, J., concurring).  Each clause is 

construed to effectuate its purposes, resulting in differing applications.  Id.  Here, the 
contention is that the Ordinance discriminates against foreign commerce because cruise 
lines  conduct  an  international  operation,  some  utilizing  exclusively  foreign-flagged 
vessels, and their vessels frequently call in the ports of two or more nations during a solitary 
tour.  Plaintiffs assert that cruise lines have the right to call on any Class A port that is 

convenient, such as the Port of Bar Harbor, and, consequently, the Ordinance disrupts the 
flow of foreign commerce.  Pls.’ Br. at 51.  Plaintiff-Intervenor agrees, arguing that the 
Ordinance  overwhelmingly  burdens  foreign  commerce  because  the  largest  ships  are 
foreign-flagged, and it is essential that there be uniformity in regulation.  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 
43.                                                                       

These assertions lack persuasive force.  The Ordinance does not discriminate on the 
basis of a “foreign” attribute.  The Ordinance is indifferent to whether passengers arrive on 
foreign-flagged vessels or are themselves citizens of foreign states.  The Ordinance also is 
silent on the subject of foreign navigation.  The Ordinance imposes a capacity limitation 
on the disembarkation of passengers regardless of the origin of the vessel carrying them or 
the itinerary that informs the vessel’s movements.  The imposition of a restriction on local 

daily disembarkations into a small town does not meddle in an area of commerce that must 
of necessity be ironed out between nations.25                             
There is no cause to think that the ability of municipalities to govern the extent of 
their participation in cruise tourism for local welfare reasons will undermine the cruise 
tourism industry or result in cruise lines having to modify their vessels, crews, passenger 
capacities or anything else in order to continue plying the seas to visit whatever nations, 

states, and municipalities remain on their itineraries, of which there are, evidently, a great 
many.  If anything, permitting municipalities to establish terms and conditions on local 
participation  in  cruise  tourism  may  encourage  more  municipalities  to  consider 
participation, knowing that they will not thereby be compelled to accommodate whatever 
level of traffic the cruise lines and their local partners wish to impose.  That more ports 

may be open to smaller vessels is to be expected rather than condemned on “constitutional” 
grounds.                                                                  
The record fails to justify the notion that there is a need for uniformity26 in the terms 
and conditions of municipal partnering with the cruise tourism industry, let alone that 

25 This case is unlike Henderson v. Mayor of the City of New York, in which the Supreme Court struck down 
a state statute that imposed certain financial obligations on ship owners whose ships carried foreign subjects 
migrating to the United States, explaining that the terms of our Nation’s immigration policy, 92 U.S. 259, 
270 (1875), “require exclusive legislation by Congress,” as the subject “in an eminent degree . . . concerns 
our international relations.”  Id. at 273.                                

26 Plaintiffs assert: “No other significant port physically capable of disembarking passengers from similar-
sized vessels restricts disembarkation in the same manner as the Ordinance.”  Pls.’ Br. at 30.  The statement 
not only admits that other ports impose restrictions, but also is so laden with qualifiers that its meaning is 
uncertain.  No party introduced the kind of evidence that would enable me to unpack this assertion, let alone 
uniformity is necessary to foreign (or interstate) commerce.  Congress has not seen fit to 
regulate the terms and conditions of municipality and cruise line engagement and it is not 

at all apparent or even probable that allowing municipalities the ability to regulate their 
level of engagement will undermine the ability of any of the several coastal states to 
participate fully in cruise tourism involving every size cruise ship imaginable and bearing 
whatever flag.  What this case really involves is the contention that cruise lines are able to 
compel local accommodation of their private assessment of the ideal economies of scale 
for cruise tourism.  See Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 30–31; Pls.’ Br. at 26.  The Foreign Commerce 

Clause does not demand such a result.27                                   
     b.   Discrimination-qua-protectionism                           
At the “very core” of the Supreme Court’s Commerce Clause jurisprudence lies an 
“anti-discrimination principle.”  Nat’l Pork Producers Council, 598 U.S. at 369.  The anti-
discrimination principle “prohibits the enforcement of state laws driven by economic 

protectionism.”  Id. (cleaned up).  Protectionist state and local laws are those that impose 
restrictions or grant benefits that favor in-state or local economic interests and disadvantage 
their out-of-state competitors.  Id.  Such measures are barred by the negative command of 
the dormant Commerce Clause because the alternative would result in the existence of 
state-by-state protectionist initiatives and reprisals that would prevent the operation of a 


27 Cases cited in support of the “foreign commerce” argument are distinguishable.  See Crosby v. Nat’l 
Foreign Trade Council, 530 U.S. 363 (2000) (holding that state law boycotting companies that do business 
with Burma violated Supremacy Clause); United States v. Locke, 529 U.S. 89 (2000) (holding Washington 
law  regulating  oil  tankers  was  preempted  in  part by  comprehensive  federal  regulatory  regime  and 
remanding for further consideration of certain state regulations); Kraft Gen. Foods, Inc. v. Iowa Dep’t of 
Revenue and Fin., 505 U.S. 71 (1992) (invalidating state corporate tax law that gave preferential tax 
treatment  to  dividend-income  received  from  domestic  subsidiaries  versus  dividends  from  foreign 
national,  cohesive  and  competitive  marketplace.    Id.  at  371–73  (discussing  cases 
illustrating this core concern).  Thus:                                   

We  have  understood  this  construction  to  serve  the  Commerce  Clause’s 
purpose of preventing a State from retreating into economic isolation or 
jeopardizing the welfare of the Nation as a whole, as it would do if it were 
free  to  place  burdens  on  the  flow  of  commerce  across  its  borders  that 
commerce wholly within those borders would not bear.  The provision thus 
“‘reflect[s] a central concern of the Framers that was an immediate reason 
for calling the Constitutional Convention: the conviction that in order to 
succeed, the new Union would have to avoid the tendencies toward economic 
Balkanization that had plagued relations among the Colonies and later among 
the States under the Articles of Confederation.’”                    

Oklahoma Tax Comm’n v. Jefferson Lines, Inc., 514 U.S. 175, 179–80 (1995); see also 
H.P. Hood & Sons, Inc. v. Du Mond, 336 U.S. 525, 539 (1949); Baldwin v. G.A.F. Seelig, 
Inc., 294 U.S. 511, 522 (1935).  The Framers feared interstate commercial strife, not 
impartial regulations enacted for local welfare ends, with which they were no doubt 
familiar.                                                                 
State and local regulations that are not protectionist in purpose or effect are not 
prohibited by the negative command of the Commerce Clause simply because they impact 
an  out-of-state  economic  interest  associated  with  commerce.    Nat’l  Pork  Producers 
Council, 598 U.S. at 374.  After all, “[i]n our interconnected national marketplace, many 
(maybe most) state laws have the practical effect of controlling extraterritorial behavior,” 
id. (internal quotation marks omitted), including “an immense mass of inspection laws, 
quarantine laws, and health laws of every description that have a considerable influence of 
commerce outside their borders.”  Id. at 375 (cleaned up, quotation marks omitted);28 see 

28 In National Pork Producers Council v. Ross, the Supreme Court rejected a challenge to a California law 
also Camps Newfound/Owatonna, 520 U.S. at 596 (“In our zeal to advance [open markets] 
we must take care not to overstep our mandate, for the Commerce Clause was not intended 

‘to cut the States off from legislating on all subjects relating to the health, life, and safety 
of  their  citizens,  though  the  legislation  might  indirectly  affect  the  commerce  of  the 
country.’” (Scalia, J., dissenting) (quoting Huron Portland Cement Co. v. Detroit, 362 U.S. 
440, 443–444 (1960)).                                                     
Plaintiffs argue that Bar Harbor’s Ordinance is facially and per se discriminatory 
and protectionist because it impacts only travelers arriving by sea, without attempting to 

regulate the congestive impact of land-based travelers.  Pls.’ Br. at 28 (citing Chem. Waste 
Mgmt., Inc. v. Hunt, 504 U.S. 334, 344 n.6 (1992) (explaining that a per se rule of invalidity 
applies “not only to laws motivated solely by a desire to protect local industries from out-
of-state  competition,  but  also  to  laws  that  respond  to  legitimate  local  concerns  by 
discriminating arbitrarily against interstate trade”)).  In Hunt, the Supreme Court struck 

down an Alabama law that imposed fees on the deposit of out-of-state hazardous waste 
(but not in-state hazardous waste) in an in-state commercial landfill, classifying the law as 
a facial violation of the Commerce Clause.  504 U.S. at 336–37; see Or. Waste Sys., Inc. v. 
Dep’t of Envtl. Quality of State of Or., 511 U.S. 93, 98–99 (1994) (invalidating protectionist 
surcharge imposed on solid waste trucked from out of state destined for in-state landfill).  

However,  unlike  these  protectionist  circumstances,  the  circumstances  here  involve  a 


to certain standards.  598 U.S. at 365.  The law did not discriminate based on the state or country of origin 
of the pork, but the impact of the law was felt predominantly by producers operating outside of California, 
most if not all of whom want to access California’s enormous marketplace.  Id. at 367.  The Supreme Court 
affirmed  the  dismissal  of  the  case  at  the  pleading  stage  for  lack  of  any  plausible  inference  of  a 
neutral regulation that applies regardless of the state of origin of those passengers arriving 
after exhaustion of the 1,000-person limitation.  Additionally, the supposed preference 

afforded to land-based travelers is not one that is conditioned on the state or national 
citizenship of land-based travelers.29                                    
The burdens and benefits of Bar Harbor’s Ordinance do not discriminate based on 
the interstate or international character of those persons seeking to participate in the local 
economy.  The burden is not imposed because of the interstate nature of the traffic but 
rather  because  of  various  features  of  that  traffic,  already  discussed,  that  hamper  the 

experience of local welfare.  Like Californians’ decision to prohibit traffic in certain food 
products produced under locally disfavored conditions, Nat’l Pork Producers Council, 598 
U.S. at 363, Bar Harbor’s voters have decided to regulate traffic in persons based on that 
traffic’s distinctive contribution to locally disfavored conditions.  Doing so, they have not 
advanced any discernable local commercial interest.  In fact, a primary consequence of the 

Ordinance is to frustrate local commercial interests.                     
Nor have the voters of Bar Harbor engaged in a parochial or isolationist exercise.  
They have, instead, engaged in the exercise of imposing a restriction based on their first-
hand experience of the relative deleterious impact of high-volume disembarkations at the 
waterfront while remaining open to the entire world’s visitation.  In both purpose and 

effect, they have acted only to limit the extent to which Bar Harbor must be victim to its 


29 Another oft-cited precedent under the discrimination heading is Hughes v. Oklahoma, 441 U.S. 322 
(1979), in which the Supreme Court invalidated a state law that prohibited the out-of-state sale of locally 
grown minnows, effectively hoarding them for local purchase.  Id. at 336–37.  This case is unlike Hughes.  
own success, while continuing to welcome travelers from every corner of the world.  These 
on-the-ground realities are quite unlike the isolationist and protectionist circumstances 

discussed in the expansive corpus of dormant Commerce Clause jurisprudence. 
Plaintiffs  and  Plaintiff-Intervenor  persist  by  arguing  that  the  Ordinance  is 
discriminatory and protectionist because it has the effect of favoring hotels and other land-
based overnight accommodations.  They explain that cruise lines are in competition with 
land-based accommodations because they are competing for the patronage of travelers 
seeking to visit a particular destination.  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 35–36; Pls.’ Br. at 28, Pl.-Int.’s 

Reply Br. at 27–28 (ECF No. 199).  However, the Ordinance is not drawn to effectuate an 
advantage for local hoteliers, and I do not find that the Ordinance in fact produces such a 
result.30  I have no evidence from which to draw the conclusion other than the testimony 
of former or current cruise line executives who stated that cruise lines compete in the 
hospitality sector against land-based accommodations for the consumer’s discretionary 

travel dollar.  As interesting as the testimony was, it was reductionist in the extreme.  The 
same comparison might be drawn between two non-Californian producers of pork products 
seeking to place their products in California stores, where one complies with California 
law and the other does not.  Or we might compare a non-Californian producer of pork 
products with a Californian producer of beef products.  In either example, the producers 

compete for dollars directed toward meat consumption, yet that obvious point did not 

30 Plaintiff-Intervenor also argues that the Ordinance is protectionist because reduced waterfront traffic will 
enable the Town to collect more paid parking revenue and because Mr. Sidman stated that he preferred 
smaller ships with their more well-to-do passengers.  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 26.  The paid parking contention is a 
straw grasp and as such does not warrant serious consideration.  As for Mr. Sidman’s personal opinion 
about passengers arriving on smaller ships, there is no evidence to support a finding that his opinion 
inform the Supreme Court’s evaluation of the merits in National Pork Producers Council.  
I can see no reason why it should control here.  Reducing the constitutional inquiry so that 

discrimination is found and heightened standards are imposed whenever one product or 
service is impacted by a regulation but a competing product or service is not is a recipe for 
widescale elimination of state and local regulations impacting the provision of goods and 
services.31                                                               
     c.  Arteries of Commerce                                        
Finally, the negative command of the Commerce Clause means that state and local 

governments have restricted power to issue legislation or regulations that serve to slow or 
obstruct the flow of commerce.  South Dakota v. Wayfair, Inc., 138 S. Ct. 2080, 2089–90 
(2018).  Obstructions that are protectionist in nature are routinely struck down, as discussed 
in the preceding section.  Like the concern over protectionist measures that stack the deck 
in favor of in-state economic interests, the concern for the health of the Nation’s arteries 

ensures  that  the  Nation  avoids  economic  Balkanization,  meaning  the  isolation  of 
neighboring states into separate economic units.  Id. at 2089.  Unlike discriminatory 
scenarios, classic “free-flow” commerce cases are cases in which a state enacts a law 
evenhandedly to regulate in-state economic activity (e.g., trucking), but does so in a manner 
that prevents operation of the enterprise within the enacting state according to a standard 

observed in neighboring or surrounding states, effectively halting interstate transportation 


31 The argument also disregards the fact that travelers staying in hotels are dispersed throughout the Town 
and Mount Desert Island.  They do not impact the waterfront the same way that cruise lines and their 
passengers do.  Many land-based tourists intent upon visiting Acadia National Park may well avoid Bar 
through that state.  See Kassel v. Consolidated Freightways Corporation of Delaware, 450 
U.S. 662, 671 (1981) (invalidating Iowa law barring trucks longer than 60 feet); S. Pac. 

Co. v. Arizona ex rel. Sullivan, 325 U.S. 761 (1945) (invalidating state law that prohibited 
the operation of interstate trains having more than a certain number of railroad cars).  Less 
common, but similarly concerning cases arise out of a state’s creation of a monopolistic 
enterprise that prohibits competition.  See, e.g., Buck v. Kuykendall, 267 U.S. 307, 315–16 
(1925) (invalidating state law prohibiting common carriers from using highways to carry 
persons  between  Seattle, Washington  and  Portland,  Oregon  without  first  obtaining  a 

certificate of public convenience and necessity from the State of Washington, where 
issuance of a certificate to one carrier for purposes of a given route precluded issuance of 
a certificate to another carrier for the same route).  The Ordinance does not fit into either 
category.                                                                 
Plaintiffs argue that the Ordinance clogs “the arteries of commerce” by impeding 

“the ability of large cruise ships to move persons from port to port according to itineraries 
that are interstate and frequently international.”  Pls.’ Br. at 26.  They emphasize that cruise 
lines are engaged in the transportation of persons free to travel as they see fit.  Id. at 26–
27.  Plaintiff-Intervenors observe that the Commerce Clause exists in part to ensure open 
access to the facilities of interstate traffic and the free flow of persons and property without 

undue restraint.  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 19–23.                                
The record in this case demonstrates that the Ordinance does indeed stem the flow 
of interstate commercial activity by reducing the daily volume of persons disembarked into 
Bar Harbor from cruise ships.  However, the mere fact that a state or local law impedes the 
free flow of commerce does not result in an automatic finding of invalidity.  “State laws 
that ‘regulat[e] even-handedly to effectuate a legitimate local public interest . . . will be 

upheld unless the burden imposed on such commerce is clearly excessive in relation to the 
putative local benefits.’”  Wayfair, 138 S. Ct. at 2091 (quoting Pike v. Bruce Church, Inc., 
397 U.S. 137, 142 (1970)).  The burden-benefit calculus recognizes that, “in the absence 
of conflicting legislation by Congress, there is a residuum of power in the state to make 
laws  governing  matters  of  local  concern  which  nevertheless  in  some  measure  affect 
interstate commerce or even, to some extent, regulate it.”  S. Pac. Co., 325 U.S. at 767.32  

When considering whether local regulation comes within the residuum of state power, 
courts may consider factors such as whether the matter regulated is a localized concern, the 
extent to which the regulation interferes with national commerce, and the incentive at the 
national level to attempt to regulate what would amount to multifarious and diverse local 
concerns.  Id.; Duckworth v. Arkansas, 314 U.S. 390, 394 (1941); see also Sproles v. 

Binford, 286 U.S. 374, 390 (1932) (recognizing “the established principle that in matters 
admitting  of  diversity  of  treatment,  according  to  the  special  requirements  of  local 
conditions, the states may act within their respective jurisdictions until Congress sees fit to 
act.”).  “But ever since Gibbons v. Ogden, [22 U.S. (9 Wheat.) 1 (1824)], the states have 


32 See National Pork Producers Council, 598 U.S. at 375 (recognizing “the usual legislative power of a 
State to act upon persons and property within the limits of its own territory, a feature of our constitutional 
order that allows different communities to live with different local standards” (internal quotation marks and 
citation omitted)); Maine v. Taylor, 477 U.S. 131, 151 (1986) (“The Commerce Clause significantly limits 
the ability of States and localities to regulate or otherwise burden the flow of interstate commerce, but it 
does not elevate free trade above all other values.  As long as a State does not needlessly obstruct interstate 
trade or attempt to place itself in a position of economic isolation, it retains broad regulatory authority to 
protect the health and safety of its citizens and the integrity of its natural resources.” (internal quotation 
not been deemed to have authority to impede substantially the free flow of commerce from 
state to state, or to regulate those phases of the national commerce which, because of the 

need of national uniformity, demand that their regulation, if any, be prescribed by a single 
authority.”  S. Pac. Co., 325 U.S. at 767.33                              
I reject the contention that the question of a local municipality’s relative tolerance 
of cruise tourism based on local conditions is an aspect of the national commerce that 
requires the national uniformity that only Congress can provide.  There are a great many 
varieties of port facilities and communities that house them.  Cruise tourism, based on the 

record before me, is a function of cruise line and local community collaboration.34  See, 
e.g., Exs. 32 & 161.  It has always proceeded on that basis in Bar Harbor.  See, e.g., Ex. 
260 at 1 (Bar Harbor Cruise Tourism Destination Management Plan, “prepared for the use 
of the Town of Bar Harbor residents, stakeholders, municipal agencies and cruise industry 
partners”).  I have no reason to conclude that it does not proceed on a similar basis 

elsewhere.    The  parties  are  agreed  that  different  municipalities  impose  a  variety  of 
constraints, such as caps and limited cruise ship days, though no party has attempted to 
canvas the variety of measures employed by domestic municipalities for purposes of this 
litigation.35  In any event, this case illustrates that the impact of cruise tourism on local 

33 Gibbons v. Ogden is a formative Commerce Clause decision that struck down a New York enactment 
that granted one company the exclusive right to navigate coastal waters in vessels powered by steam, which 
enactment was in direct conflict with the federal government’s grant of coasting licenses to other steamboat 
owners.  22 U.S. at 221.                                                  

34 For example, Rockland has “a very limited number of slots that it allows for ships over a lower berth 
capacity of 500.”  Ex. 195 at 56.  Rockland permits only “six bookings per year per season unless” it 
“authorize[s] a waiver to add any ships beyond that.”  Id.                

35 This phenomenon may well suggest a nationwide interest among cruise tourism communities to impose 
living conditions is a hyperlocal concern that is not well suited to a one-size-fits-all 
regulatory approach at the federal level.                                 

Furthermore,  Bar  Harbor  is  regulating  a  “matter[  ]  of  local  concern”  in  both 
“character and effect.”  S. Pac. Co., 325 U.S. at 767.  The history of cruise tourism at Bar 
Harbor demonstrates the unique challenges that cruise tourism imposes on Bar Harbor.  
These challenges gave rise to a democratic effort, where the voters weighed the relevant 
local commercial and noncommercial interests and ultimately adopted the Ordinance.  
Modern-day, board-directed cruise practices (particularly those of foreign-flagged cruise 

lines36)  do  not  allow  much  room  for  smaller  municipalities  to  manage  their  local 
experiences based on daily limits on the number of passengers coming ashore.  Cruise lines 
are utilizing ever larger vessels to achieve unprecedented economies of scale, principally 
for shareholder profit.  At the same time, cruise lines will not call at a port unless the entire 
complement of passengers is permitted to come ashore.37  These characteristics of cruise 

tourism make it unworthy of overly solicitous judicial action that would negate an exercise 
in democratic self-determination that is better informed of existing, localized conditions.  
Nothing in the Constitution dictates municipal obeisance to the economies of scale of cruise 
tourism.  Nor, as far as I can tell, does the dormant Commerce Clause legislate adherence 

perceive in this litigation is not that the several States will enact differing regulations, but rather that they 
will all conclude that divestiture provisions are warranted.”).           

36 The representative voices of cruise tourism offered at trial, like Plaintiffs’ and Plaintiff-Intervenor’s 
briefing, did not speak to a need for moderation but rather have thematically favored catering to the interests 
of the cruise lines with the very largest capacity vessels.  Those cruise lines happen to conduct their trade 
with foreign-flagged vessels.                                             

37 But see Ex. 193 at 8–9.  Chris Martin, Director of Port Operations for Holland America, testified at his 
deposition that Holland America stops at ports that limit the number of passenger disembarkations, such as 
to neoclassical liberalism any more than the Due Process Clause compels observation of 
Mr. Herbert Spencer’s Social Statics.                                     

In the absence of federal or state law dictating the outcome, reasonable citizens at 
the municipal level will come to different conclusions about the proper balance between 
unabated cruise tourism and relative calm, and the outcome of their democratic process is 
the best measure of the polity’s tolerance in light of local conditions.  For this reason, I 
conclude that non-discriminatory and non-monopolistic state laws and local regulations 
that have the impact of restraining outsize cruise tourism do not deserve per se invalidation 

or a heightened standard of review through which judges rather than citizens become the 
final arbiters of the terms by which cruise tourism will be conducted in every port in the 
Nation.  In other words, “[c]ompelling reasons justify treating these laws differently from 
laws favoring particular private businesses over their competitors.”  United Haulers Ass’n, 
Inc. v. Oneida-Herkimer Solid Waste Mgmt. Auth., 550 U.S. 330, 342 (2007) (relying, in 

part, on Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. v. Massachusetts, 471 U.S. 724, 756 (1985) (“The States 
traditionally  have  had  great  latitude  under  their  police  powers  to  legislate  as  to  the 
protection of the lives, limbs, health, comfort, and quiet of all persons” (internal quotation 
marks omitted))).                                                         
     d.  Burdens versus benefits                                     

Although  the  Bar  Harbor  Ordinance  “regulates  even-handedly  to  effectuate  a 
legitimate  local  public  interest”  while  imposing  “incidental”  effects  on  commerce,  it 
remains necessary to determine whether “the burden imposed on such commerce is clearly 
excessive in relation to the putative local benefits.”  Pike, 397 U.S. at 142.  Under this 
standard, “the extent of the burden that will be tolerated will . . . depend on the nature of 
the local interest involved, and on whether it could be promoted as well with a lesser impact 

on interstate activities.”  Id.  But even so, “[p]reventing state officials from enforcing a 
democratically adopted state law in the name of the dormant Commerce Clause is a matter 
of ‘extreme delicacy,’ something courts should do only ‘where the infraction is clear.’”  
Nat’l Pork Producers Council, 598 U.S. at 390 (quoting Conway v. Taylor’s Executor, 66 
U.S. (1 Black) 603 (1862)).                                               
The parties disagree as to whether the Ordinance’s burdens on commerce are clearly 

excessive in comparison to the local benefits.  Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor view the 
Ordinance’s benefits as purely speculative and Bar Harbor’s interest in reducing cruise 
tourism as illegitimate.  On the other hand, Bar Harbor and Mr. Sidman characterize the 
Ordinance as imposing a burden on the cruise industry’s business model rather than on 
interstate commerce.  To the extent that the Ordinance does affect commerce, they argue 

that its burdens are not clearly excessive in relation to the local benefits. 
I first consider the Ordinance’s burdens on commerce.  There is no doubt that the 
Ordinance will have some effect on commerce since almost 80% of the cruise ships that 
presently visit Bar Harbor have a lower berth capacity in excess of 1,000 and are thus 
unlikely to call at Bar Harbor.38  But it is impossible to predict the Ordinance’s precise 

consequences.  The Ordinance continues to permit the daily disembarkation of persons 
traveling  by  cruise  ship  in  large  numbers,  even  if  those  numbers  are  inadequate  to 


38 As of December 2022, 107 of the 134 cruise vessel calls for the 2023 cruise season were scheduled for 
accommodate most of the cruise ships plying the Atlantic seaboard these days.  Milton 
Friedman and the Chicago school would recoil at the claim made by business interests that 

the free market economy of private actors cannot adapt to the limitation at the Bar Harbor 
waterfront, and who instead seek snug harbor behind a constitutional challenge that strikes 
me as not well fitted to the facts on the ground.  Given the attractiveness of the port of Bar 
Harbor, it is to be expected that cruise enthusiasts intent of reaching Bar Harbor will find 
a cruise line to carry them there.  Some cruise lines already offer suitable vessels with Bar 
Harbor itineraries.  Other cruise lines no doubt will adjust to serve the emerging market 

charted by municipalities interested in following Bar Harbor’s example by accommodating 
cruise tourism subject to more constituency-pleasing passenger caps (something that is 
unlikely to develop so long as cruise lines and their proxies threaten constitutional litigation 
over limited access).  See id. at 385 (plurality opinion) (“But from all anyone can tell, other 
out-of-state competitors seeking to enhance their own profits may choose to modify their 

existing operations or create new ones to fill the void.”).               
Insofar as the Ordinance causes visitors to travel to Bar Harbor through other means, 
like smaller cruise ships, the Ordinance is best described as burdening the cruise line 
industry’s business model, rather than interstate commerce.  See Exxon Corp. v. Governor 
of  Maryland,  437  U.S.  117,  127  (1978)  (reasoning  that  Maryland’s  law  prohibiting 

petroleum producers from operating retail gas stations in-state did not unduly burden 
commerce because “interstate commerce is not subjected to an impermissible burden 
simply because an otherwise valid regulation causes some business to shift from one 
interstate supplier to another” when “there [was] no reason to assume that their share of 
the entire supply [would] not be promptly replaced” by other companies).  Unfortunately 
for Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor, the Commerce Clause does not protect the cruise 

line industry’s “particular structure [and] methods of operation.”  Id.  While the Ordinance 
will  likely  cause  visitation  to  Bar  Harbor  to  decrease,  thereby  affecting  interstate 
commerce, it is impossible to know exactly how many fewer visitors will travel to Bar 
Harbor.  Thus, I conclude that the Ordinance will impose an uncertain burden on interstate 
commerce.                                                                 
I next consider the Ordinance’s local benefits.  I reject Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-

Intervenor’s arguments that Bar Harbor’s proffered interests in lessening congestion and 
conserving municipal resources are illegitimate.39  Courts have held that similar local 
interests are legitimate in a variety of contexts.  See, e.g., Maine v. Taylor, 477 U.S. 131, 
151 (1986) (“The Commerce Clause significantly limits the ability of States and localities 
to regulate or otherwise burden the flow of interstate commerce, but it does not elevate free 

trade above all other values” [because] States “retain[ ] broad regulatory authority to 
protect the health and safety of its citizens and the integrity of its natural resources.”); 
Memphis v. Greene, 451 U.S. 100, 126–27 (1981) (describing a city’s “decision to reduce 
the flow of traffic” as “legitimate” and the “residential interest in comparative tranquility” 
as “unquestionably legitimate” in analyzing a claim under the Thirteenth Amendment);40 


39 On this point, they rely on Young v. Coloma-Agaran, No. 1:00-CV-00774-HG-BMK, 2001 WL 1677259, 
at *11 (D. Haw. Dec. 27, 2001) (stating that “[e]liminating the presence of tourists from the Bay is not a 
proper reason for the Ban as it directly contradicts the very purpose of the Commerce Clause”), aff’d, 340 
F.3d 1053 (9th Cir. 2003).  The district court cited no authority for this proposition, and while the Ninth 
Circuit affirmed the district court, the Ninth Circuit decided the case on alternative grounds and thus did 
not opine on the Commerce Clause.                                         
Tart v. Massachusetts, 949 F.2d 490, 501 (1st Cir. 1991) (discussing the legitimate local 
interest in promoting public health).  Insofar as the Ordinance reduces the number of 

persons who visit Bar Harbor by cruise ship, the Ordinance commensurably advances Bar 
Harbor’s local interest in lessening congestion—particularly at the waterfront, over which 
the cruise industry will otherwise domineer.  This noneconomic benefit, while not precisely 
measurable, is both real and reasonably well calibrated to ameliorate the particularized 
excesses of modern cruise tourism and how it interfaces with Bar Harbor’s waterfront. 
In short, the Ordinance imposes some burden on the “free flow” of commerce, but 

that  burden  is  impossible  to  quantify.    The  1,000-person  limitation  is  a  significant 
downshift from the passenger caps previously observed in Bar Harbor.  But that downshift 
also promotes noneconomic interests.41  Bar Harbor with the MOA passenger limits and 
Bar Harbor with the 1,000 daily passenger limit are significantly different places.  The 
voters of Bar Harbor “weigh[ed] the relevant ‘political and economic’ costs and benefits 

for themselves,” and the voters evidently decided that the noneconomic benefits of the 
Ordinance favored adopting it.  Nat’l Pork Producers Council, 598 U.S. at 382 (plurality 
opinion) (quoting Moorman Mfg. Co. v. Bair, 437 U.S. 267, 279 (1978)).  Considering the 


40 The circumstances in Greene gave rise to a lively dissent based on the observation that the interest in 
comparative tranquility can be a pretext for walling off white communities from communities of color.  
Greene, 451 U.S. at 136 (Marshall, J., dissenting).  Unlike Greene, this case has no undertones of invidious 
discrimination.                                                           

41 Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor see the impact on the movement of vessels and persons as burdens so 
weighty as to compel per se invalidation of the Ordinance.  Obviously, I have not viewed it the same way.  
The lead authority they cite is Edwards v. California, 314 U.S. 160 (1941), in which California attempted 
to minimize the extent to which it would bear the burden of indigent migration secondary to the Dust 
Bowl—a “grave and perplexing social and economic dislocation” (i.e., the greatest natural disaster of our 
Nation’s history), id. at 173.  The analogy between Dust Bowl migration and cruise tourism is strained, to 
intimate “nature of the local interest[s]” involved in Bar Harbor’s decision to limit cruise 
tourism, I cannot say that the Ordinance imposes a burden on commerce that “is clearly 
excessive in relation to the putative local benefits.” Pike, 397 U.S. at 142.42 

                      CONCLUSION                                     
For the reasons set forth above, I conclude as follows:              
The challenged Bar Harbor Ordinance, Bar Harbor Code Chapter 125, Article VII, 
Section 125-77, is a lawful exercise of home rule authority under the Maine Constitution 
and is not preempted by state law.                                        

The Ordinance does not violate the Due Process Clause or the Commerce Clause of 
the United States Constitution.                                           
The  Ordinance  is  in  part  conflict  preempted  under  the  Supremacy  Clause.  
Specifically, the 1,000-person cap is conflict preempted insofar as seafarer shore access is 
concerned.  But insofar as cruise ship passengers are concerned, the 1,000-person cap 

survives challenge under the Supremacy Clause.                            
Based on these legal conclusions, judgment will enter for the Town of Bar Harbor 
on Counts II and III of Plaintiffs’ Complaint and on Counts II, III, and IV of Plaintiff-
Intervenor’s Complaint in Intervention.  As for the Supremacy Clause claims stated in the 
first  counts  of  the  Plaintiffs’  Complaint  and  the  Plaintiff-Intervenor’s  Complaint  in 

Intervention, judgment will enter IN PART for the Town of Bar Harbor, as Plaintiffs and 


42 Cf. Nat’l Pork Producers Council, 598 U.S. at 382 (plurality opinion) (describing that weighing out-of-
state producers’ costs of compliance against the moral and health interests of California’s residents as “a 
task no court is equipped to undertake” and stating that in “a functioning democracy, policy choices like 
Plaintiff-Intervenor fail to demonstrate cause to invalidate the Ordinance insofar as it 
operates as a restriction on passenger disembarkations, and IN PART for Plaintiffs and 

Plaintiff-Intervenor, as they have demonstrated that the Ordinance is partially preempted 
in relation to seafarer shore access, although it is by no means self-evident that any material 
alteration of the legal relationship of the parties has thereby been achieved. 
SO ORDERED.                                                          
Dated this 1st day of March, 2024.                                   

                              /S/ Lance E. Walker                    
                              UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            

                     DISCTRICT OF MAINE                                 

ASSOCIATION TO PRESERVE       )                                           
AND PROTECT LOCAL             )                                           
LIVELIHOODS, B.H. PIERS, L.L.C.,  )                                       
GOLDEN ANCHOR L.C.,           )                                           
B.H.W.W., L.L.C., DELRAY      )                                           
EXPLORER HULL 495 LLC,        )                                           
DELRAY EXPLORER HULL 493      )                                           
LLC, and ACADIA EXPLORER 492  )                                           
LLC,                          )                                           
                            )                                           
        Plaintiffs,         )                                           
                            )                                           
                            )    No. 1:22-cv-00416-LEW                  
PENOBSCOT BAY AND RIVER       )                                           
PILOTS ASSOCIATION,           )                                           
                            )                                           
        Intervenor-Plaintiffs,  )                                       
                            )                                           
   v.                       )                                           
                            )                                           
TOWN OF BAR HARBOR,             )                                         
                            )                                           
        Defendant,          )                                           
                            )                                           
                            )                                           
CHARLES SIDMAN,               )                                           
                            )                                           
        Intervenor-Defendant  )                                         

                    DECISION AND ORDER                                  

   In this action, a group of Bar Harbor businesses and business owners who seek to 
preserve commercial relationships with cruise lines and their passengers challenge a local 
exercise of popular sovereignty by the people of Bar Harbor who seek to curtail cruise ship 
visitation to maintain a certain quality of local life.  The resulting controversy is of 
constitutional dimension and tenders a host of questions, but chiefly asks whether a 
municipality  with  privately  owned  port  facilities  can  restrain  interstate  cruise  ship 
commerce for local welfare ends or must make way and permit whatever level of commerce 

the local market can support.                                             
   The matter proceeded to a bench trial following the Court’s issuance of an expedited 
schedule and Plaintiff’s withdrawal of a motion for preliminary injunction.  The Town of 
Bar Harbor has agreed not to enforce the challenged land use ordinance pending the 
outcome of litigation.  Following a three-day trial in July 2023, the parties submitted 
closing arguments in writing.  Based on my consideration of the evidentiary record, the 

arguments of counsel, and the law, judgment will enter in favor of the Defendant Town of 
Bar Harbor on every count but one, and even as to that one count, judgment will enter 
partially for the Town, as only limited declaratory relief is awarded in recognition of a 
partial preemption problem, without affording Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor the relief 
they are seeking.                                                         

                           FINDINGS                                     
                          The Parties                                   
   The Plaintiffs in this action are the Association to Preserve and Protect Local 
Livelihoods (“APPLL”); B.H. Piers, L.L.C.; Golden Anchor, L.C., doing business as 
Harborside Hotel; BHWW LLC, doing business as Bar Harbor Whale Watch; Delray 

Explorer Hull 495 LLC; Delray Explorer Hull 493 LLC; and Acadia Explorer 492, LLC. 
   APPLL is a business league comprised of members who own or operate businesses 
in Bar Harbor and seek to capitalize on the economic opportunities associated with the 
provision of goods and services to cruise ship passengers.  APPLL members include 
owners and employees of local restaurants, retail stores, and tour-related businesses. 

   The Delray Explorer Hulls and the Acadia Explorer are tender vessels owned by 
similarly named limited liability companies.  The vessels carry cruise ship passengers from 
cruise ships anchored in Frenchman Bay to Bar Harbor.  B.H. Piers and Golden Anchor 
own piers in Bar Harbor where the tender vessels disembark and embark cruise ship 
passengers.  BH Piers operates the pier located at 1 West Street, known as Harbor Place.  
Golden Anchor operates the pier located at 55 West Street.  The pier owners have received 

approval from the Coast Guard for the use of the piers for this purpose.  
   BHWW is a limited liability company doing business as Bar Harbor Whale Watch 
Company.    BHWW  coordinates  whale  watching  tours  to  cater  to  the  cruise  lines’ 
passengers.                                                               
   The  Penobscot  Bay  and  River  Pilots  Association  appears  in  this  matter  as 

Intervenor-Plaintiff.  The Pilots Association is a private corporation that provides pilotage 
services in a region that extends 75 miles from Boothbay Harbor to Frenchman Bay and 
75 miles from the west pilot station on Penobscot Bay to the Penobscot River Port of 
Brewer.  By law, foreign-flagged and certain domestic cruise ships must be piloted within 
Frenchman Bay by a local pilot who is familiar with the Bay and its channels.  Pilots board 

cruise ships (and other large vessels) eight to twelve miles offshore and direct navigation 
to anchorage grounds in Frenchman Bay (or to other destinations in Penobscot Bay).  The 
anchorage  grounds  in  Frenchman  Bay  are  roughly  two  miles  from  the  Bar  Harbor 
waterfront and piers.  The Pilots Association’s pilotage operations are regulated by the 
Maine Pilotage Commission.  In response to the expansion of cruise vessel traffic, the 
Pilots Association has invested in vessels and has expanded its employment of pilots.  In 

particular, the Pilots Association now has a dedicated crew and purpose-built vessel to 
handle the piloting demands associated with cruise vessel traffic in Frenchman Bay.  Fees 
for piloting services are established by law and are a function of the size of the vessel.  Ex. 
39.  The larger the ship, the greater the fee.                            
   The Defendant is the Town of Bar Harbor.  Bar Harbor is, among other things, a 
Class A port of entry for foreign-flagged cruise vessels reentering the United States and a 

popular port-of-call on North Atlantic cruise ship itineraries.  Bar Harbor is governed by a 
Town Council.  The Bar Harbor Town Council has sponsored a cruise ship committee for 
more than a dozen years, but recently disbanded the committee.  The Town of Bar Harbor 
has a year-round population of roughly 5,500 persons, a number comparable to the lower 
berth capacity (a rough measure of passenger capacity) of a solitary large cruise ship. 

   One of the residents of Bar Harbor is Charles Sidman, Intervenor Defendant.  Mr. 
Sidman owns an art gallery in town.  Mr. Sidman was a primary proponent and co-author 
of the initiative that resulted in the land use ordinance challenged in this case. 
                       Non-Parties of Note                              
   Among the cruise lines that visit Bar Harbor are several lines owning foreign-

flagged cruise vessels.  When they call, these vessels typically spend about nine hours at 
anchorage, enough time for passengers to clear customs and participate in a shore visit of 
reasonable duration.                                                      
   The State of Maine has two other Class A ports of entry, Eastport and Portland.  
Neither is as proximate to Acadia National Park as Bar Harbor.  If a cruise ship called in 

Eastport or Portland, travel by motor coach to reach and return from Acadia National Park 
would consume much of the day.                                            
   The  Maine  Office  of  Tourism  is  a  marketing  agency  for  the  State  of  Maine.  
CruiseMaine, part of the Maine Office of Tourism, promotes cruise communities in Maine 
and Maine-based cruise ship tourism in general.  CruiseMaine engages with cruise lines 
and the cruise industry trade association and sometimes functions as a municipality-to-

cruise-line liaison.  The Maine Office of Tourism and CruiseMaine perceive cruise travel 
as a positive type of tourism for Maine because it introduces many first-time visitors to 
Maine from a broader geographical region as compared to visitors who travel by land, most 
of whom are from east coast states and Canada.  CruiseMaine maintains a software 
platform called the PortCall system, https://maine.portcall.com.  Through the PortCall 

system, CruiseMaine posts real-time data related to vessel movements and port operations.  
State funding supports CruiseMaine.                                       
   Carnival, Royal Caribbean, and Norwegian are among the cruise line companies 
that are active in New England and market cruise itineraries that feature Bar Harbor as a 
marquee port.  These three cruise lines are noted because they operate foreign-flagged 

vessels and operate some of the largest cruise vessels that call in Bar Harbor and elsewhere 
along the Maine coast.1  The foreign-flagged lines see Bar Harbor as the most convenient 
and desirable port of entry when coming from foreign waters (such as Canadian waters). 

                        Background Facts                                
   The Town of Bar Harbor lies on the shores of Frenchman Bay in the North Atlantic 
on the eastern side of Mount Desert Island.  The Town is nestled in an area of great scenic 
beauty abutting Acadia National Park, a national asset that the Park Service refers to as the 
Crown Jewel of the North Atlantic Coast.  Given Bar Harbor and Acadia National Park’s 
placement and prominence among other North Atlantic attractions accessible by sea, the 

cruise ship industry regards Bar Harbor as a marquee destination, the kind which appeals 
to customers and around which an appealing cruise itinerary can be built. 
   Although Bar Harbor had long experienced healthy tourist seasons, in the 2000s 
there was room for growth.  Additionally, the season was limited to the period between 
Memorial Day and Labor Day.  Local businesses and their representatives on the Town 

Council hoped to expand the tourist season and saw cruise tourism as one means of doing 
so.                                                                       
   In 2006, the Maine Department of Transportation, the Maine Port Authority, and 
the Town of Bar Harbor joined in a task force to commission a cruise tourism destination 
management  plan  for  Bar  Harbor.    The  authors  of  the  management  plan  proposed 

architectural and engineering improvements to develop the Town to facilitate expanded 


1 MSC Cruises is a fourth cruise line that fits the description.  The executive director of CruiseMaine 
characterized the domestic cruise lines as “smaller.”  In addition to Bar Harbor, Eastport, Portland, and 
Rockland have ports suited to larger foreign vessels.  Only Bar Harbor and Portland have significant traffic 
involving foreign cruise vessels seeking a Class A port of entry, with Bar Harbor and Portland having 
cruise ship passenger access, chiefly by means of improved pier facilities.  Ex. 260.  In 
2008, the Town accepted a recommendation from the task force to embody a cruise ship 

committee and establish a policy of daily cruise passenger caps of 3,500 passengers for the 
peak-tourism, summer months of July and August, and 5,500 passengers for the shoulder-
season months of May, June, September, October, and November.  The cruise ship lines 
were receptive to the invitation and amenable to the passenger caps, and cruise ships began 
to call in Frenchman Bay in ever-increasing numbers.  Local enterprise and investment 
gradually expanded to meet the increased demand for passenger tendering and other local 

services.                                                                 
   The Town established its daily passenger caps largely by reference to the lower 
berth capacities of existing cruise vessels.  The caps were understood to be “voluntary” in 
that they were mutually acceptable to the then-existing Council and the cruise lines.  The 
Council and the cruise line industry were able to agree that cruise line passengers generally 

would not be well served in Bar Harbor if two or more cruise ships each with an especially 
large lower berth capacity were to disembark on the same day, even during the quieter 
shoulder season.  They also recognized that it was sensible to lower the cap during Bar 
Harbor’s peak summer season, given the competing demand for local services generated 
by peak, land-based tourism.  The progenitors of Bar Harbor’s cruise ship management 

plan  also  understood  that  cruise  ship  visitations  impose  certain  municipal  burdens,2 


2 Bar Harbor maintains a per-passenger fee structure for cruise ship visits.  Ex. 29.  The Town has used the 
fees generated in this manner (roughly $1 million per year) to fund town salaries and enlarge its police 
force, among other things.  The increase in personnel, particularly law enforcement, is itself indicative of 
including congestion, that can detract from the character of the Town and reduce the quality 
of life for residents.  To manage the cap, the Town instituted a reservation system overseen 

by its harbormaster.  When the new reservation system was first instituted, cruise ship visits 
were not yet a daily phenomenon, despite the reference to “daily” caps.   
   Over the past 15 years, Bar Harbor has experienced a steady growth in its tourist 
season, due chiefly to its proximity to Acadia National Park.  In 2021, Acadia National 
Park attracted roughly four million visitors.  For many of these visitors, a trip to Acadia 
includes a visit to downtown Bar Harbor.  Meanwhile, more and larger cruise ships 

anchored in Frenchman Bay and cruise ship passenger visitation levels started to approach 
or meet the established daily caps on an ever-increasing and consistent basis.  Although 
cruise ship passengers account for a limited portion of the total number of annual visitors 
to greater Bar Harbor and Mount Desert Island, they arrive at a destination that is already 
blessed and burdened by land-based tourism and at a waterfront of rather limited area.  

Cruise ship passenger traffic also has a pronounced impact on and near the waterfront, 
including the eastern portion of West Street and the northern portion of Main Street. 
   Over the same period of years, the process of tendering passengers to shore has 
become a more efficient operation.  In the early years, the Tender Parties (i.e., the pier 
owners,  tender-vessel  LLCs,  and  BHWW)  would  augment  the  cruise  lines’  tender 

operations so that passengers came ashore in a variety of ships, including whale watch 
ships.  In 2017, the Tender Parties designed and built three vessels dedicated to tendering 
cruise  ship  passengers.    They  also  invested  in  barges  to  facilitate  the  movement  of 
passengers from the cruise ships to the tender vessels.  While these developments are 
commendable from the standpoint of market efficiency, part of the transactional cost is that 
the demand for tender operations means that cruise ship tenders have become the dominant 
harbor traffic during the expanded cruising season.3                      

   For some, the expansion of tourism resulted in a return on planning and investment.  
For others, it resulted in a growing disaffection with municipal life.  Increasingly, town 
leaders heard from constituents who were experiencing this disaffection.4  Then came 
COVID.  During the visitation-hiatus brought about by COVID quarantine orders—which 
restrictions impacted both land and sea visitation to Bar Harbor and Acadia National 

Park—some  residents  of  Bar  Harbor  were  reminded  that  there  are  measures  of  a 
municipality’s success other than its volume of business.                 
   In January of 2021, Bar Harbor commissioned a marketing research firm to perform 
a quantitative study and write a report concerning local opinions.5  Ex. 323.  The survey 


3 Each of the three tender vessels is licensed to hold 149 passengers and they steadily rotate into and out of 
the harbor in roughly 30-minute intervals, primarily disembarking passengers onto the piers mid-morning 
and embarking them again in the afternoon, though passengers move back and forth throughout the day.  
Consequently, there are times of day that involve more intense movement of people in either direction, not 
unlike the tide, albeit more regular in terms of timing.  Foreign-flagged vessels, for example, arrive mid-
morning and spend on average nine hours at anchorage.  Their passengers spend on average six to seven 
hours on land in various locations, including downtown Bar Harbor.  In the morning, passengers congregate 
near the piers and waterfront, including at motor coach staging areas, while some passengers walk into the 
Town.  Passengers may be in any number of locations during the day, such as on a whale watch tour or an 
Acadia bus tour, or at a local restaurant or business.  In the afternoon, passengers (and their assorted 
conveyances) again congregate near the piers to obtain passage back to their cruise ship. 

4 Town Council Chair Valerie Peacock testified that in 2020 and continuing residents of Bar Harbor have 
expressed strong feelings of angst over the perceived negative impact of the cruise ship industry, but also 
concern over the expansion of tourism in general.  July 13 Tr. at 112–13, 121–25. 

5 Pan Atlantic Research’s study surveyed year-round and seasonal residents, property owners, and business 
owners of Bar Harbor to examine what they thought about sea-based tourism.  See generally Ex. 323.  
Overcrowding, too many ships/tourists, and environmental concerns ranked among the most popular 
answers to Bar Harbor’s greatest challenges in managing cruise ship tourism.  Ex. 323 at 29; see also July 
13 Tr. at 212:14–214:9 (describing the increased street traffic and congestion at the waterfront when cruise 
had a healthy response rate.  Many respondents voiced concern for the congestion6 caused 
by cruise ship visits and ranked cruise ship tourism a net negative for the Town.  The 

growing concern over popular sentiment was also acknowledged by the cruise industry.  In 
July of 2021, the president of the Cruise Lines International Association proposed new 
passenger caps as part of a “negotiation” with the Town.  The proposal, accepted by the 
Town Council, involved a daily passenger reduction for the shoulder season7 and a new 
monthly cap of 65,000 visitors specifically to address concerns of capacity.  Although 
public pressure was growing, the Bar Harbor Town Council, ultimately, was not then 

constituted to provide the pressure relief that many citizens hoped for.8 
   On February 15, 2022, the Council approved the formation and membership of a 
new working group to explore the modification of the daily passenger limits for the 2023 
and 2024 cruise seasons.9  On August 16, 2022, the Town Council accepted the task force’s 
recommendation to enter into a memorandum of agreement (“MOA”) with each cruise line 



6 Congestion is not exclusively a matter of pedestrian congestion on sidewalks.  Congestion includes 
vehicular congestion and overcrowding of stores, parks, and other public spaces. 

7 By 2019, it was a misnomer to describe the months of September and October as a “shoulder season” 
when describing the volume of cruise ship passengers coming ashore in Bar Harbor.  In fact, over 60 percent 
of Bar Harbor’s annual cruise ship passenger visits occur in September and October.  September and 
October are also the months that see the most visitation by the very largest vessels (>3,500 passengers).  
See, e.g., Ex. 165.  According to CruiseMaine’s director, the number of cruise visitors entering Bar Harbor 
in September and October is roughly equivalent to the number of tourists on town streets in June and July. 

8 At trial, counsel for Plaintiffs worried that testimony concerning public disaffection and council activities 
(much of Chair Peacock’s testimony) was an attempt to construct a false legislative history in support of 
the Ordinance.  I have not interpreted the testimony in that fashion.  Rather, the testimony related some of 
the contemporaneous local history that set the stage for the success of the Initiative. 

9 Separately, the Bar Harbor Cruise Ship Committee was already corresponding with the Cruise Lines 
and  directed the  preparation  of  a  form  MOA  for  circulation.10    The  resulting  MOA  
withdrew the months of April and November from the Town’s reservation system, lowered 

daily passenger caps from 5,500 to 3,800 for the months of May, June, September, and 
October (with a +200-passenger leeway), and instituted a new monthly cap of 65,000.  In 
September and October of 2022, the Town entered into MOAs with American Cruise 
Lines, Disney Cruise Lines, Holland America Line, Hurtigruten Expeditions, Norwegian 
Cruise Line, Pearl Seas Cruises, Princess Cruises, Rogay Caribbean Cruises, Seabourn 
Cruise Line, Viking Cruises, and Windstar Cruises Marshall Islands.       

   While the Town Council publicly pursued its voluntary measures, a group of local 
residents formed a petitioning committee to advance a citizens’ initiative that would 
achieve  more  significant  reductions  by  mandatory  means.    Their  initiative  proposed 
amending the Bar Harbor Code to require a permit to disembark cruise ship passengers 
“on, over, or across any property located within the Town of Bar Harbor.”  Ex. 243A.  It 

also specified that “no more than 1,000 passengers, in the aggregate, may disembark on a 
single calendar day.”  Id.  The Initiative called for a $100 minimum penalty per excess 
unauthorized disembarkation, which would be assessed against the property owners (the 
Pier  Operators).    The  Initiative  states  that  the  harbormaster  shall  develop  rules  and 
regulations to establish a reservation system for disembarkation, a mechanism for counting 

and  tracking  disembarkations,  a  procedure  for  reporting  violations,  and  “any  other 


10 Two weeks prior, on August 2, 2022, the Town Council went into executive session to discuss the 
citizens’ petition that would become the Ordinance but was, at that time, still in need of voter approval.  
Exs. 207–210.  The Town Council also conducted a workshop on that date to discuss the future of cruise 
tourism in Bar Harbor.  Among other matters under consideration were cautionary litigation warnings from 
provisions” deemed necessary.  Id.  By the time the Initiative went to vote, the citizens’ 
group had revised it by substituting the word “persons” for “passengers.”  Ex. 243B.  They 

did this based on a group member’s observation that cruise ships carry a great many 
crewmembers as well as passengers.  The group decided it would be best to use the term 
persons to capture both passengers and crew.  Ex. 230.                    
   The Initiative included a lengthy statement of purpose focusing on quality of life, 
but also expressing concern for public safety and the commercial interests of businesses 
other than those seeking the patronage of cruise ship passengers.         

   Concerning quality of life, the Initiative’s sponsors wrote:         
   Underlying this proposed amendment is the fact that, in recent years, the 
   Town has been a popular port of call for cruise ships of varying sizes, from 
   which passengers disembark via tender boats that offload passengers directly 
   into the downtown area. The large numbers of passengers have overwhelmed 
   the downtown area, resulting in excessive congestion and traffic on public 
   streets  and  sidewalks,  frequent  overcrowding  of  parks  and  other  public 
   spaces, and inundating local amenities and attractions, all of which result in 
   a diminished quality of life for Town residents.                     

Ex. 243A.  Concerning public safety and other business interests, the sponsors wrote: 

   The unchecked and continued influx of disembarking cruise ship passengers 
   in the downtown area jeopardizes the Town’s ability to deliver municipal 
   services to Town residents and visitors (for example, cruise ship passengers), 
   including the provision of public safety services (police and fire), emergency 
   medical services (EMS), in-patient and out-patient services at local hospitals, 
   pandemic control measures, and public sanitation services, and also impacts 
   the ability of local shops, restaurants, and other businesses to attract and 
   serve customers.                                                     

Id.  The sponsors then summarized:                                        

   A town-wide survey was conducted in 2021, showing that a majority of 
   respondents believe that the volume of disembarking cruise ship passengers 
   is too high and has a negative impact on the Town and the health, safety and 
   welfare of its residents.                                            
Id.                                                                       
   The Initiative was listed as an article on the warrant for Bar Harbor’s November 8, 
2022, special town meeting.  A majority of the registered voters who voted supported the 
article.  Bar Harbor now has a land use ordinance that establishes a disembarkation cap of 

1,000 persons per day.                                                    
   During trial, Mr. Sidman testified that the 1,000-person cap was not the product of 
“a rigorously defensible finding or study or calculation.”  July 13 Tr. at 312:20–21.  The 
group proposed various caps, some higher, but ultimately arrived at 1,000 persons.  In 
communication with other members of his group, Mr. Sidman expressed a preference for 
smaller cruise ships because the passengers on smaller cruise ships tend to be more well-

to-do.  He also expressed a dislike of “the biggies,” meaning the larger cruise ships. 
                     Subsequent Rulemaking                              
   A  variety  of  details  remain  for  purposes  of  sorting  out  the  best  approach  to 
implementing the Ordinance.  These include proposed rulemaking to exclude crew from 
the 1,000-person limit (for reasons that will be explained shortly), determining how best to 

monitor passenger volume, and determining how to proceed in the event the limit is 
disregarded  by  the  Pier  Owners.    See,  e.g.,  Exs.  66,  204.    However,  at  present 
implementation and rulemaking are suspended pending this immediate facial challenge to 
the Ordinance.                                                            
           Findings Concerning the Initiative’s Stated Purposes         

   To the extent the Initiative expresses concern for public safety due to congestion 
located anywhere other than the waterfront, West Street and lower Main Street, there is no 
empirical data to enable a fact finder to allocate responsibility for a degradation in overall 
municipal public safety between cruise and land-based tourism.  But at the waterfront, the 

press of cruise ship passengers is sufficient to raise safety concerns.  Indeed, the initiative 
sponsors’ stated concern for public safety is echoed by the cruise industry.  Ex. 32 §§ 5.3, 
5.4.  However, at least to date there does not appear to be an incident illustrating any past 
failure  in  the  delivery  of  public  services  occasioned  by  passenger  congestion  at  the 
waterfront.                                                               
   Where the stated purposes have greater significance is in regard to congestion and 

all  that  congestion  entails,  such  as  overtaxed  public  facilities,  long  lines,  crowded 
sidewalks and  businesses,  slowed  traffic,  and  the  like.    To  be  fair,  some days  with 
pronounced congestion in Bar Harbor may occur when a cruise ship is not at anchorage.  
Nighttime congestion may be particularly bad on some evenings, despite the absence of 
cruise ship passengers.  But the idea proposed by Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor that 

cruise ship traffic has a negligible impact on local conditions is disingenuous.  What video 
evidence was presented by Plaintiffs or Plaintiff-Intervenor was more in the nature of pro-
cruise marketing material that was not representative of the daily impact of cruise-related 
visitation and, instead, depicted quieter moments on quieter days.        
   It is not the fault of cruise ship passengers that the area is congested; it simply is the 

reality of conditions existing on the ground.  Cruise ship passengers come ashore in an area 
of limited space nestled between the Public Pier and Harborside Hotel.  One of the piers 
over which cruise ship passengers travel sits at the east end the harbor, adjacent to the 
Public Pier, near the juncture of Main Street and West Street.  The other pier sits at the 
west end of the harbor.  Between them is a short stretch of commercialized waterfront along 
West Street.  The passengers’ impact on the relatively confined waterfront area is marked,11 

though their spillover impact on the Town more widely is best described as cumulative.  
But even further up Main Street and in public areas the impact is real and tangible to locals 
who visit the downtown.                                                   
   As attested to by witnesses Dr. Bill Horner, Nathan Young, and Seth Libby, the 
press of people in the downtown intensifies on cruise ship days.  Dr. Horner described it 
as a dramatic growth in the press of people with a tremendous amount of traffic, particularly 

in the waterfront area.  Mr. Young described sidewalks busy enough that he prefers to walk 
in the street when he has to go downtown on a cruise ship day.  Mr. Libby described the 
scene similarly, stating that cruise ship visits produce greater crowding.  The witnesses also 
testified that  they avoid the downtown on  cruise ship days due  to the extent  of the 
congestion.  Horner, Libby, and Young all testified that they voted in favor of the initiative 

because they felt that elected officials had failed to act in a timely or meaningful manner 
to curtail the impact of cruise ship visits.  I find that these witnesses provided a fair and 
accurate assessment of the impact of cruise ship visits in terms of both the intensification 
of congestion and the undesirability of a trip downtown for many residents on “cruise ship 
days,” which increasingly means most days of the cruise ship season.12    


11 See, e.g., Ex. 32 § 5.3.  Congestion is bad enough that the Cruise Line Industry Association has proposed 
that Bar Harbor give over to cruise passenger traffic most of the public pier as well.  Id. at §§ 5.3, 5.8.  This 
would effectively give over the vast majority of Bar Harbor’s waterfront to the primary function of 
facilitating cruise ship passenger arrival and departure during the cruising season. 

12 Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor offered the testimony of Professor Todd Gabe, Ph.D., of the University 
of Maine, who studied congestion in Bar Harbor’s tourist district.  One study occurred at the tail end of 
   Congestion in downtown Bar Harbor is a seasonal fact of life, but it is empirically 
exacerbated by the regular morning and afternoon pulse of cruise ship passengers and the 
tour buses and other vehicles13 that arrive to cater to them.  In addition, fall congestion is 

largely a function of cruise ship visitation, resulting in an undeniable change to the annual 
rhythm of municipal life.  Cruise ship passenger visitations may well be viewed by rational 
voters as indulgent and burdensome surplusage in an already taxed ecosystem.  In this 
sense, the initiative sponsors’ stated concern for generalized welfare and qualify-of-life 
considerations is neither unsubstantiated nor unrelated to the unique congestion problem 

associated with high-berth cruise tourism, let alone arbitrary and irrational.14 
              Findings Concerning the Ordinance’s Impacts               
   Most of the cruise lines that schedule visits to Bar Harbor plan visits in cruise ships 
having a lower berth capacity in excess of 1,000.  Only 27 of the 134 ships scheduled to 
make calls in the 2023 season would be able to disembark their entire complement of 

passengers without exceeding the cap.  It appears unlikely that a cruise line will schedule 

daily 3,500 passenger cap for August) would result in only a negligible further experience of congestion in 
a town already impacted by land-based tourism and the baseline 3,500 cruise ship passengers.  Ex. 319 at 
2.  Professor Gabe also spent a number of days walking about Bar Harbor and recording his subjective 
experience at various times and locations.  About half of the walks he took were “at times early in the 
morning, during months outside the peak tourism seasons and in inclement weather, or at places located on 
the outskirts of the tourism district.”  Ex. 319 at 6.  I did not find Professor Gabe’s testimony or reports to 
be helpful in terms of achieving whatever finding Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor intended me to draw. 

13 See, e.g., Ex 12A; Ex. 32 § 4.2.  In addition to tour buses, there are vans, minibuses, motor coaches, taxis, 
and bike tours.  While the pulses of congestion are most keen in the mid-morning and afternoon, there is a 
greater mid-day press as well, which the restaurateur members of APPLL seek to capitalize on. 

14 Plaintiffs insist that the Town of Bar Harbor must prove that the Ordinance can be based on a finding that 
the  one-thousand-and-first  passenger disembarked  and  every  passenger  who follows  is  somehow a 
“noxious” or “toxic” threat to the well-being of the Town.  See, e.g., Pls.’ Reply Br. at 6, 16, 20, 34.  I do 
not believe that is the test.  The Ordinance is obviously designed to draw a line between levels of impact 
occasioned by the berth capacities of cruise ships, not the relative innocuousness or noxiousness of 
a port call for purposes of a shore visit if it cannot disembark its ship’s entire complement 
of  passengers  on  a  single  day.    Consequently,  in  terms  of  the  volume  of  visitors 

disembarking from cruise ships, the likely avoidance of the large vessels will reduce 
passenger visitation volume by a significant percentage, likely north of 80 and possibly as 
high as 90 percent (in the short term) compared with the peak numbers experienced in 2022 
and 2023.                                                                 
   Cruise lines with large ships will, necessarily, adjust their itineraries and reroute 
high-berth ships to other ports.  Plaintiffs would likely feel a financial impact occasioned 

by reduced cruise passenger patronage.  The pier and tender boat operators will likely lose 
fees, the APPLL members will likely experience a reduction in business and will perhaps 
close during the shoulder season or retain fewer employees in those months, and the Pilots 
Association will have decisions to make related to maintaining personnel, vessels, and 
equipment without the revenue generated by regular piloting of the largest cruise ships into 

and out of Frenchman Bay.                                                 
   Because no ecosystem is static, presumably some cruise lines will adjust practices 
to maximize utilization of the new caps.  However, the record does not contain evidence 
that would allow for a reliable calculation on that score, nor would I expect it to.15  There 
is no evidence to suggest, for example, that the cruise lines with the smaller ships have 


15 The cruise industry stated in 2019 that it “is poised to continue its overall expansion, adding new ships 
faster than retiring them.”  Ex. 32 § 6.  “The demographics of the passengers seeking cruises in a given area 
will largely dictate that seize and amenities of vessels.  Vessels should be considered moveable high-value 
assets for generating shareholder profits.  To this end, cruise companies will evaluate the yield achievable 
by a ship assignment in a given market.”  Id.  Conceivably, if, as the cruise lines evidently fear, more 
municipalities impose capacity restrictions, then certain cruise lines will reconsider their decision to focus 
either a sufficient number of ships or that their cruises are in sufficient demand to approach 
the caps on a regular daily basis.  Even if visitation is eventually maximized under the 

Ordinance, the overall number of cruise ship passenger visits would be significantly less 
than the level of visitation experienced in 2022 and 2023 and less than a third of the level 
authorized under the recent MOAs.                                         
                          DISCUSSION                                    
   Plaintiffs allege in their Complaint (ECF No. 1) that Bar Harbor’s new Ordinance 
is preempted by operation of the United States Constitution’s Supremacy Clause (Count 

1), violates the Commerce Clause (Count 2), and offends “substantive due process” (Count 
3).  Plaintiff-Intervenors similarly allege in their Complaint-in-Intervention (ECF No. 43) 
that the ordinance violates the Supremacy Clause (Count 1) and the Commerce Clause 
(Count  2),  but  additionally  allege  that  the  ordinance  is  preempted  under  the  Maine 
Constitution based on alleged conflict with Maine’s statutory pilotage system (Count 3) 

and its statutory economic and community development program (Count 4).   
   I address the Maine Constitution first before turning to the federal claims. 
A.   The Maine Constitution                                               
   The  Maine  Constitution  affords  municipalities  home  rule  authority.    “The 
inhabitants of any municipality shall have the power to alter and amend their charters on 

all matters, not prohibited by Constitution or general law, which are local and municipal in 
character.  The Legislature shall prescribe the procedure by which the municipality may so 
act.”  Me. Const. art. VIII, pt. 2, § 1.  Home rule authority has been conferred on Maine 
municipalities by the Maine Legislature to the maximum extent of the Legislature’s power 
to grant it, excepting only home rule authority that is elsewhere denied expressly or by 
clear  implication  in  Maine  law,  see  30-A  M.R.S.  § 3001,  or  where  “the  municipal 

ordinance in question would frustrate the purpose of any state law,” id. § 3001(3).  When 
the exercise of home rule is challenged, the municipal power authorized under Maine law 
is to be “liberally construed to effect its purposes” and courts must apply a “rebuttable 
presumption that any ordinance . . . is a valid exercise of a municipality’s home rule 
authority.”  Id. § 3001(1), (2).                                          
   The Maine Constitution also extends to each Maine municipality the authority to 

provide for their electors to exercise “the direct initiative . . . in regard to its municipal 
affairs.”  Me. Const. art IV, pt. 3, § 21.  The authority of municipal electors (i.e., voters) to 
legislate by means of a direct initiative is coextensive with the authority of the municipality 
to exert its home rule authority.  Portland Reg’l Chamber of Commerce v. City of Portland, 
253 A.3d 586, 592–93 (Me. 2021).  It was thus an exercise of home rule authority when 

the petition committee circulated the initiative that resulted in Bar Harbor’s challenged 
Ordinance.                                                                
   Plaintiff-Intervenor does not contend that the petition process and resulting initiative 
exceeded any state or municipal law or rule insofar as the Ordinance’s enactment is 
concerned.  Nor does it contend that the initiative is not an exercise of home rule authority 

involving municipal affairs.  Instead, Plaintiff-Intervenor contends that the Ordinance 
prevents the accomplishment of state priorities articulated in state laws respecting the 
establishment  of  a  system  of  pilotage  and  a  program  of  economic  and  community 
development.  Challenges involving the “implied” prohibition “must be evaluated on a 
case-by-case basis by examining the language of the ordinance and any statutes enacted by 
the Legislature.”  Id. at 593.                                            

   In Maine Revised Statutes Title 38 the Maine Legislature has declared a policy and 
purpose “to provide for a system of state pilotage in order to provide maximum safety from 
the dangers of navigation,” “to maintain a state pilotage system devoted to the preservation 
and  protection  of  lives,  property,  the  environment  and  vessels,”  and  “to  insure  the 
availability of pilots”  38 M.R.S. § 85.  The pilotage statute then goes on to define terms, 
outline jurisdiction, specify the vessels that must take pilots, prohibit piloting without a 

license, establish a pilotage commission and outline its duties, and set up a system of 
licensure for pilots.  None of these statutory provisions prohibits a municipality from 
enacting  an  ordinance  that  restricts  local  passage  from  private  piers  onto  municipal 
property.  Nor does the Ordinance conflict with the objective of the Legislature when it 
comes to pilotage.  Pilots remain free to conduct their profession and to pilot vessels within 

the region, including by piloting them to Frenchman Bay anchorages.  Nothing in the 
pilotage statute can reasonably be construed as a legislative intention, express or implied, 
to  divest  municipalities  of  home  rule  authority  over  local,  land-based,  police  power 
concerns whenever the exercise of that authority could foreseeably impact the volume of 
business available to pilots.  The establishment of a pilotage system is not an implicit 

statutory surrogate for compulsory, maximal municipal participation in cruise tourism. 
   Plaintiff-Intervenor also argues that Maine’s statutory intention of “formulat[ing] 
and implement[ing] economic development policies and programs” that are coordinated 
among the State’s several agencies and various “municipal and regional economic efforts,” 
5 M.R.S. § 13052, will not tolerate an exercise in municipal home rule that curtails cruise 
tourism.  With the statute in question, the Maine Legislature organized a Department of 

Economic  and  Community  Development.    Id.  §§ 13054,  13055.    The Department  is 
empowered to, among other things, implement policies and programs, work with other 
organization including municipalities, conduct planning and research, communicate with 
the private sector, prepare and distribute publications, and implement programs assigned 
to it by the Governor or Legislature.  Id. § 13056.  The Department’s Office of Tourism is 
empowered to engage in promotional and informational activities, encourage development, 

review and comment activities, and similar activities.  Id. §§ 13090-C, 13090-E.  However, 
it has no power to compel or even regulate municipal engagement with cruise line tourism. 
   While  the  Department  and  the  Office  have  rule-making  authority,  Plaintiff-
Intervenor does not rely on any rules to support its preemption claim.  Instead, Plaintiff-
Intervenor  argues  that  any  municipal  action  inconsistent  with  greater  economic 

development  necessarily  prevents  coordination  as  well  as  economic  and  community 
development.  The argument is essentially that through declaration of an economic and 
community development goal and creation of a related department and tourism office, the 
Maine Legislature has imposed a duty on every municipality and political subdivision to 
act in the best interest of the Chamber of Commerce.  Of course, if the maximization of 

commerce were compulsory, a vast body of zoning and land use regulation would not be 
worth the paper it is written on.  To be certain, most municipalities yearn for the types of 
burdens of fortune that Bar Harbor experiences.  The broad and undifferentiated aspiration 
toward commercial health made manifest by the Legislature’s creation of the Office of 
Tourism and CruiseMaine is sensible and one supposes is in league with the desires of most 
municipalities most of the time.  However, the picture of commercial development is not 

painted  in  primary  colors  alone  but  rather  exists  in  a  pastiche  of  other  municipal 
considerations.  A municipality that rationally exercises its home rule authority in a manner 
which is modestly in tension with the highest marginal commercial harvest, the type which 
is the sine qua non of the tourism office, is not an outlaw.              
   The  fact  is  that  the  Legislature  has  not  empowered  these  instrumentalities  to 
override municipal home rule authority.  The Legislature has not even empowered these 

instrumentalities to wield the interstitial power of a special master or an ombudsman in 
matters of municipal and cruise line conflict.  If it had, then some manner of administrative 
process would have preceded before or alongside this litigation.  Yes, CruiseMaine may 
support, educate, promote, and play the part of a sales broker when it comes to cruise 
tourism, but decidedly missing from the enumerated powers is the power to trump home 

rule authority to dictate acceptable levels of municipal participation in cruise tourism.   
   Nor  can  the  mere  existence  of  the  Department  or  its  tourism-focused 
instrumentalities  be  regarded  as  an  implied  prohibition  against  a  local  municipal 
determination to reduce engagement with the cruise line industry.  Public bodies may 
exercise only the powers conferred upon them by law.  The conferral of powers must be 

found “in the enabling statute either expressly or by necessary inference as an incidence 
essential to the full exercise of powers specifically granted.”  Hallissey v. Sch. Admin. Dist. 
No. 77, 755 A.2d 1068, 1072 (Me. 2000).  The derogation of home rule authority must rest 
on  something  more  immediate  and  direct  than  the  Legislature’s  pro-commerce 
proclamations and the institution of a body tasked with broadly supporting and promoting, 
but not regulating, tourism.  If home rule authority is to be overcome it ought to be based 

on something with a little more starch, such as the text of the law.  As is so often the case, 
when textual (i.e., legal) support for a challenge to home rule authority is lacking, an 
invitation is made to the court to begin at the intellectual equivalent of divining legislative 
intent from high upon the pillars, which is to say, an appeal toward sophistry.  To be certain, 
for some there is an intoxicating appeal to wielding such authority, acting as a sort of 
judicial “God of the gaps” and the line is long of those only too eager to cast their light 

upon the unwashed masses to shepherd us through the darkness left by the democratic 
process.  For ease of analysis, this case does not present a close call of implied prohibition 
of home rule.  Any argument of implied prohibition of municipal home rule authority must 
be attended by a particularly muscular example of how the purpose of the enabling 
legislation  is  at  cross  purposes  with  the home  rule.   The  analysis cannot  be  one  of 

contingencies or at least if it is, must ultimately be tethered to the noncontingent; a prime 
mover example in the law that demonstrates how home rule errs.            
   The Legislature should not be viewed as having impliedly prohibited the exercise 
of municipal home rule authority in an area that the Legislature has not even attempted to 
regulate in any direct manner.  Even in areas that the Legislature has regulated directly, 

municipal home rule authority is not so easily preempted.  See, e.g., Portland Reg’l 
Chamber,  253  A.3d  at  591  (upholding  Portland’s  minimum  wage  ordinance  despite 
existence of state minimum wage statute); Portland Pipe Line Corp. v. City of S. Portland, 
240 A.3d 364, 368 (Me. 2020) (holding that Maine Coastal Conveyance Act, which 
involved the State’s exercise of police power in matters of oil transfers, did not preempt a 
local  ordinance  that  prohibited  an  activity  even  though  the  Maine  Department  of 

Environmental Protection (“DEP”) had issued an approval that allowed for but did not 
require the activity in question); E. Perry Iron & Metal Co., Inc. v. City of Portland, 941 
A.2d 457, 463 (Me. 2008) (upholding municipal regulation of junkyard in absence of 
evidence that it frustrated the purposes of Maine’s Solid Waste Act); Smith v. Town of 
Pittston, 820 A.2d 1200, 1201 (Me. 2003) (4-3) (upholding municipal ordinance banning 
the spread of septage in the Town of Pittston despite existence of DEP rules establishing 

minimal performance criteria for such spreading, DEP’s award of permit application to 
conduct such spreading, and legislative intent to encourage development of affordable, 
environmentally suitable waste disposal sites).  When it comes to the growth of tourism in 
Maine there simply is no state-sanctioned regulatory scheme to frustrate, only a broadly 
worded  aspirational  objective  of  regional  economic  coordination  and  an  associated 

initiative of the Office of Tourism to support, educate, and promote cruise communities. 
   Plaintiff-Intervenor’s  claims  of  preemption  under  the  Maine  Constitution 
(Complaint in Intervention Counts 3 and 4) fail.                          
B.   The United States Constitution                                       
Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor mount challenges to Bar Harbor’s Ordinance based 

on the Supremacy Clause and the Commerce Clause.  Pls.’ Compl. Counts 1–2; Compl. in 
Intervention Counts 1–2.  Plaintiffs add a claim under the Due Process Clause.  Pls.’ 
Compl. Count 3.  I begin my review with the Supremacy Clause, move on to the Due 
Process Clause, and finish with the Commerce Clause.                      
   1.   The Supremacy Clause                                            
   The Supremacy Clause provides that “the Laws of the United States . . . and all 

Treaties made . . . under the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of 
the  Land;  and  the  Judges  in  every  State  shall  be  bound  thereby,  any  Thing  in  the 
Constitution or Laws of any state to the Contrary notwithstanding.”  U.S. Const. art. VI, 
cl. 2.  Due to the Supremacy Clause, when Congress enacts a statute, state law is preempted 
to the extent of any conflict with the federal statute.  Haaland v. Brackeen, 599 U.S. 255, 
287 (2023).  Sometimes a federal statute will expressly preempt state law, but preemption 

also can arise “by virtue of restrictions or rights that are inferred from statutory law.”  
Kansas v. Garcia, 140 S. Ct. 791, 801 (2020).  Preemption can result, for example, based 
on the inference that Congress has effectively occupied the field in a certain area of 
regulation even though Congress has not announced a preemptive intention.  City of 
Burbank v. Lockheed Air Terminal Inc., 411 U.S. 624, 633 (1973).  Preemption can also 

result based on the existence of competing commands, allowances, or standards in federal 
and state law.  “If federal law ‘imposes restrictions or confers rights on private actors’ and 
‘a state law confers rights or imposes restrictions that conflict with the federal law,’ ‘the 
federal law takes precedence and the state law is preempted.’”  Garcia, 140 S. Ct. at 801 
(quoting Murphy v. National Collegiate Athletic Assn., 138 S. Ct. 1461, 1480 (2018)).  

However, “[i]nvoking some brooding federal interest or appealing to a judicial policy 
preference should never be enough to win preemption of a state law.”  Virginia Uranium, 
Inc. v. Warren, 139 S. Ct. 1894, 1901 (2019).                             
   “‘[T]he basic question involved in [Supremacy Clause] cases . . . is never one of 
interpretation of the Federal Constitution but inevitably one of comparing two statutes.”  
Swift & Co. v. Wickham, 382 U.S. 111, 120 (1965).  “[F]or the purposes of the Supremacy 

Clause, the constitutionality of local ordinances is analyzed in the same way as that of 
statewide laws.”  Hillsborough Cnty., Fla. v. Automated Med. Laboratories, Inc., 471 U.S. 
707, 713 (1985).                                                          
        a.  Federal regulation of maritime matters                      
   Plaintiffs point to the many ways in which federal law applies to vessels, seafarers, 
and ports or “maritime terminal facilities” to argue that there is no room for a municipality 

to restrict shore access via port facilities.  The cited federal law, rules, and regulations, 
however,  do  nothing  to  legislate  in  the  area  of  cruise  tourism  (or  even—with  one 
exception—landward  passage).    Plaintiffs  cite  the  Federal  Maritime  Transportation 
Security Act, 46 U.S.C. §§ 70101-70132, which governs “port security,” and the entire 
Coast Guard Authorization Act, Pub. L. 111-281, 124 Stat. 2905 (Oct. 15, 2010), which as 

the title suggests authorizes appropriations for the Coast Guard.  Bar Harbor’s Ordinance 
clearly does not compete with federal law in the area of port security or Coast Guard 
operations.16                                                             
   Plaintiff-Intervenor advances similar preemption arguments to those pressed by 
Plaintiffs but shifts the focus slightly to contemplate the regulatory burdens imposed on 


16 In Plaintiffs’ rundown of federal law touching on vessels and maritime facilities, they cite 33 C.F.R. 
§ 105.105(a)(2) for the proposition that Coast Guard regulations under the Maritime Transportation 
Security Act are intended to be preemptive.  Pls.’ Br. at 20.  The reference is perplexing because it merely 
states that the requirements of maritime security for facilities apply to the owner or operator of a facility 
that receives vessels certified to carry more than 150 passengers, yet Plaintiffs have elsewhere informed the 
Court that the tender vessels are licensed to hold 149 passengers.  In any event, clearly the Bar Harbor 
cruise lines and pilots.  The Pilots Association argues that because “[t]he federal presence 
in the area of navigation, safety, and environmental protection is extensive, pervasive, 

demanding, and complex,” and “follows a vessel from its design phase through its ultimate 
scrapping,” and “link[s with] a series of international agreements dependent upon the 
predictability of access to ports,” and involves oversight by the Coast Guard, Customs and 
Border Protection, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Environmental 
Protection Agency, and the Federal Maritime Commission, “[l]ocal restrictions on vessel 
operations . . . pose a direct threat to the necessary uniformity of federal oversight and the 

efficient operation of cruise . . . vessels.”  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 9–10 (ECF No. 190).  This 
language checks off the lawyerly rhetoric box but fails to tease out any actual conflict.  The 
Ordinance simply does not purport to regulate vessel requirements or make the operation 
or navigation of cruise vessels any less safe, environmentally sound, or efficient.  Nor does 
it interfere in any way with the performance of cruise line oversight by the Coast Guard, 

CBP, CDC, EPA, or the FMC.  Nor can it be said that any one of the identified agencies 
has  attempted  to  occupy  the  regulatory  field  when  it  comes to  balancing competing 
interests related to a municipality’s participation in cruise tourism.  Federal regulation in 
this arena is not even extant, let alone pervasive.  City of Burbank v. Lockheed Air Terminal 
Inc., 411 U.S. 624, 633 (1973) (“It is the pervasive nature of the scheme of federal 

regulation of aircraft noise that leads us to conclude that there is pre-emption.”). 
   Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor’s invocation of all the many ways that federal law 
touches upon maritime traffic is precisely the kind of “brooding federal interest” mentioned 
in Hillsborough, 471 U.S. at 713.  As such, it does not suffice to support the preemption of 
Bar Harbor’s disembarkation restriction.17                                
        b.  Seafarer shore access                                       

   When  Plaintiffs  and  Plaintiff-Intervenors  do  dive  down  into  the  maritime 
regulations to retrieve something specific, the palatable18 oyster they surface with is a 
preemptive maritime security regulation that requires the owners or operators of maritime 
facilities (such as Plaintiff Pier Owners) to ensure shore access for seafarers who wish to 
transit from a vessel through or over regulated facilities.  33 C.F.R. § 105.237.19 

   (a) Access required.  Each facility owner or operator must implement a 
   system . . . for providing access through the facility that enables individuals 
   to transit to and from a vessel moored at the facility and the facility gate in 
   accordance with the requirements in this section.  The system must provide 
   timely access as described in paragraph (c) of this section and incorporate 
   the access methods described in paragraph (d) of this section at no cost to the 
   individuals covered.                                                 

   (b) Individuals covered.  The individuals to whom the facility owner or 
   operator must provide the access described in this section include—  


17 Plaintiffs muse in their post-trial brief that the Ordinance is unenforceable because the Pier Owners lack 
the authority to stop or turn back cruise ship passengers who arrive at the pier.  Pls.’ Br. at 31 n.27 (also 
noting that this point is “not part of this legal challenge”).  The idea that the Pier Owners cannot lawfully 
comply ignores the reality that cruise ship passengers (and crew) arrive at the piers pursuant to a prearranged 
reservation system and have long done so with the understanding that a free-for-all would result in chaos 
and passenger dissatisfaction with the shoreside experience.  Besides, compliance should present no 
difficulty as we are assured by Plaintiff and Plaintiff-Intervenor that oversized cruise ships will no longer 
call at Bar Harbor.                                                       

18 Plaintiff-Intervenor also cites 33 U.S.C. § 5, which prohibits the levying of tolls “or any other impositions 
whatever,” upon vessels, water craft, or their passengers or crew, by “any non-Federal interest, if the vessel 
or water craft is operating on any navigable waters subject to the authority of the United States.”  Pl.-Int.’s 
Reply Br. at 12.  This oyster has spoiled.  The argument is waived for purposes of this litigation since it 
was first raised in a reply brief.  But in any event, the Ordinance is designed to prevent excessive 
disembarkations from cruise ships, subject to a fine imposed against the pier owner to ensure compliance.  
It is not a toll, fee, or other imposition directed toward cruise ships or their passengers and crew associated 
with their use or enjoyment of navigable waters.                          

19 The regulations provide that part 105 has preemptive effect “insofar as a State or local law or regulation 
applicable to the facilities . . . would conflict with the regulations in part 105, either by actually conflicting 
        (1) Seafarers assigned to a vessel at that facility;            

        (2) Pilots; and                                                 

        (3) Representatives of seafarers’ welfare and labor organizations. 

Id. § 105.237.  Cruise ship passengers are not seafarers.  Seafarers are persons “assigned 
to a vessel” (i.e., crew) or “pilots” or “[r]epresentatives of seafarers’ welfare and labor 
organizations.”    Id.  § 105.237(b);  see  also  id.  § 96.250(f)(4)  (providing  that  safety 
management systems include personnel procedures ensuring that “[e]ach vessel is properly 
crewed with qualified, certificated and medically fit seafarers”).        
   Because the Bar Harbor Ordinance is drawn as a restriction on the numbers of 
“persons” and not just “passengers” who may be disembarked on or over municipal land, 
Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor proclaim a victory.  I agree with Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-
Intervenor (and evidently with Defendant and Defendant-Intervenor) that the Ordinance 
cannot stand as a barrier to seafarers’ shore access when a seafarer is assigned to a vessel 
moored at either pier facility owned by the Plaintiff Pier Owners.  To the extent the 
Ordinance might be read to require a different conclusion, it cannot be enforced.  However, 
it does not follow that the entire Ordinance is invalidated or that any meaningful relief is 
to be awarded in this litigation as a result of the limited (and hypothetical) preemption 
occasioned by the seafarers’ access regulation.                           

   The scope of preemption “is guided by the rule that the purpose of Congress is the 
ultimate touchstone in every pre-emption case.”  Altria Group, Inc. v. Good, 555 U.S. 70, 
76 (2008) (cleaned up).  “That approach is consistent with both federalism concerns and 
the historic primacy of state regulation of matters of health and safety.”  Medtronic, Inc. v. 
Lohr, 518 U.S. 470, 485 (1996); see also Consumer Data Indus. Ass’n v. Frey, 26 F.4th 1, 
12 (1st Cir. 2022) (remanding for district court to analyze the scope of a federal law’s 

preemptive impact), cert. denied, 143 S. Ct. 777 (2023).  Here, the purpose of the federal 
regulation is to assure seafarer access to shore when seafarers are aboard and assigned to a 
vessel moored at the regulated facility.  Consequently, the preemptive reach of the federal 
seafarers’ access regulation extends no farther than to a controversy involving an attempt 
by Bar Harbor to deny shore access to a seafarer on a vessel moored at either facility. 
   This case does not present any actual controversy of that (or any other actual) kind.  

Moreover, even if the conflict preemption associated with the seafarers’ access regulation 
is appropriately resolved in the context of this litigation, it would not achieve the result that 
Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor seek, which is total invalidation of the Ordinance.  A 
limited invalidation of the Ordinance for purposes of seafarers’ access would not render 
the Ordinance an ineffective instrument to impose a disembarkation cap against cruise ship 

passengers, since passengers are not seafarers.                           
   Plaintiffs  and  Plaintiff-Intervenor  insist  nonetheless  that  invalidation  of  the 
Ordinance based on its use of the word “persons” instead of “passengers” should be total.  
I digress to address this assertion, though it is unavailing.  The genesis of the digression is 
the fact that Bar Harbor has indicated that it will author a rule that limits the Ordinance by 

recognizing an exception for shore access for seafarers.  When a state, municipality or local 
agency interprets or enforces a law in a manner that avoids a conflict with federal law, 
ordinarily mere facial constitutional challenges are effectively deflected.  Wash. State 
Grange v. Wash. State Republican Party, 552 U.S. 442, 456 (2008); Ward v. Rock Against 
Racism, 491 U.S. 781, 795–96 (1989); McGuire v. Reilly, 386 F.3d 45, 58 (1st Cir. 2004).  
However, here the Ordinance’s use of “persons” unambiguously extends to seafarers, so it 

is “not readily susceptible to a narrowing construction.”  Rhode Island Ass’n of Realtors, 
Inc. v. Whitehouse, 199 F.3d 26, 35 (1st Cir. 1999).                      
   Plaintiffs also cite Maine Supreme Judicial Court opinions that they say preclude 
efforts  by  a  municipality  to  confine  the  reach  of  a  citizen  initiative  by  means  of  a 
rulemaking process.  They contend that the only available fix requires an initiative and 
election do-over.  The cases Plaintiffs cite do not support the proposition.  See Wawenock, 

LLC v. Dep’t of Transp., 187 A.3d 609, 618 (Me. 2018) (discussing methods of interpreting 
the “will of the people” when construing citizen initiatives); Davis v. SBA Towers II, LLC, 
979 A.2d 86, 92–93 (Me. 2008) (“Although Gridcom argues that the Planning Board’s 
decision to redefine the term was also procedurally improper, we need not address this 
claim.”).  And while Plaintiffs correctly observe that Maine law requires that an ordinance 

be revised “only by following the procedure required for its original enactment,” 30-A 
M.R.S. § 3004(4), it does not compel that an ordinance be invalidated in toto based on a 
limited conflict with federal law.  The default rule of constitutional jurisprudence is to the 
contrary, and here it takes little imagination to appreciate that the voters of Bar Harbor 
intended and would prefer that the Ordinance remain operative as to passengers rather than 

be invalidated as to passengers.  See Town of Windham v. LaPointe, 308 A.2d 286, 292 
(Me. 1973); see also Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of N. New England, 546 U.S. 320, 329–
30 (2006).                                                                
   In summary, yes, the Ordinance has the potential to conflict with the preemptive 
seafarers’ access regulation and requires that Bar Harbor avoid any application of the 
Ordinance that would run afoul of 33 C.F.R. § 105.237.  However, the limited conceptual 

conflict does not achieve the result that Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor are after, which 
is total invalidation of the Ordinance.20                                 
        c.  Customs and immigration                                     
   Plaintiff-Intervenor  also  argues  that  the  Ordinance  “obstructs  customs  and 
immigration screening of entrants to the United States.”  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 14.  The idea is 
that cruise itineraries in the North Atlantic often include calls in Canadian ports before 

returning to U.S. waters, so if the first port of call in the U.S. chosen by the cruise ship’s 
captain is Bar Harbor, then Bar Harbor must permit unrestricted disembarkation from the 
cruise ship as a logical consequence of any immigration and customs inspection that 
transpires aboard the ship while it is anchored in Frenchman Bay.         
   The conflict is imagined, not real.  The Ordinance does not prohibit or otherwise 

prevent entry to the United States.  Anyone admitted to the United States by CPB through 
a process that transpires aboard ship in Frenchman Bay may enter the United States, 
including in Bar Harbor.  The Ordinance does not impose an additional condition for 
admission or otherwise purport to supply a basis for exclusion from the United States, it 

20 Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor fail to articulate a set of circumstances in which an as-applied challenge 
by a seafarer necessarily would arise and hypothetical notions about what might transpire do not suffice 
since “litigants mounting a facial challenge to a statute normally ‘must establish that no set of circumstances 
exists under which the [statute] would be valid.’”  United States v. Hansen, 599 U.S. 762, 769 (2023) 
(quoting United States v. Salerno, 481 U.S. 739, 745 (1987), and discussing the exception for overbroad 
restraints on free speech)).  Assuming reservations are booked and tendering arrangements are made such 
that a combined total of more than 1,000 passengers and seafarers would be disembarked on a given day, 
further constitutional litigation based on the preemptive force of 33 C.F.R. § 105.237 is susceptible to 
avoidance when the Court is assured that the handling of any such scenario will be addressed in advance 
by the Town’s rulemaking process in recognition of the partial preemption of the Ordinance.  The facial 
imposes  only  a  limitation  on  local  disembarkations  and  a  fine  for  excessive 
disembarkations,  regardless  of  the  admission  status  of  persons  disembarked.21  

Nevertheless, Plaintiff-Intervenor likens this case to Takashi v. Fish & Game Commission, 
334 U.S. 410 (1948), and Maine Forest Products Council v. Cormier, 586 F. Supp. 3d 22 
(D. Me. 2022).  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 14–16.  This case is unlike either.     
   In Takashi, the Supreme Court invalidated, on a variety of grounds, a discriminatory 
California law that banned lawful residents ineligible for citizenship from engaging in 
commercial fishing.  334 U.S. at 413–415, 422.  Plaintiff-Intervenor says the Ordinance 

similarly discriminates.  The discrimination argument relies on the fact that the largest 
cruise ships are all foreign-flagged vessels and the fact that all cruise ships customarily 
carry passengers who are foreign nationals.  However, the Ordinance is not drawn in 
discriminatory language and nothing that transpired at trial betrayed a discriminatory 
purpose to exclude foreign-flagged vessels or the citizens of other nations.  The Ordinance 

is drawn with the passenger capacity of ships in mind, not the nationality of the ships’ 
owners or passengers.                                                     
   In  Cormier,  Judge  Woodcock  issued  a  preliminary  injunction  enjoining 
enforcement of a protectionist state statute designed to prevent foreign workers from 


21 It bears repeating that cruise ships with passenger capacities in excess of 1,000 will likely not have Bar 
Harbor on their itineraries.  Visitation at a port is arranged many months in advance, with local, daily 
passenger caps in mind.  Consequently, the imagined conflict between an admission decision and a refusal 
to allow disembarkation (or imposition of a fine on the Pier Owners for excessive disembarkations) is 
entirely at odds with the actual practices long observed in Bar Harbor in relation to pre-scheduled port calls.  
Plaintiff-Intervenor also neglected to call an expert witness to substantiate its hypothetical customs scenario 
of a cruise ship returning from foreign waters intent on making an appointment with CPB in Frenchman 
Bay as a means of forcing an unreserved port call in Bar Harbor (assuming CBP would even condone such 
engaging in the intrastate transportation of forest products.  There, the federal regulatory 
regime for alien work visas resulted in the issuance of work visas for the performance of 

specific jobs identified as part of a certification process and based on the Department of 
Labor’s specific findings that domestic workers were not available in sufficient numbers 
and  employment  of  the  aliens  would  not  negatively  impact  local  wages  and  work 
conditions.  Id. at 39–41 & n.12.  In that context, the federal government’s occupation of 
the field of foreign worker authorization was manifest, as was the conflict between the 
Maine act and federal law.  Id. at 46.  That is not the situation in this case.  There is no 

evidence in this case or cited law demonstrating that cruise lines obtain advance federal 
authorization to  disembark their entire complement of passengers specifically in  Bar 
Harbor.  Cruise lines present their passengers for inspection when they arrive at the Class 
A port designated on their own itineraries.  Cruise lines are not required by federal law to 
apply for preauthorization to call at a particular port, let alone to disembark every passenger 

upon arrival.  Nor does CPB make specific findings based on any federal law or regulation 
that cruise line passengers may disembark in any particular location in any particular 
numbers based on the cruise ship’s passenger capacity and local conditions. 
   Plaintiff-Intervenor’s customs- and immigration-based arguments for preemption 
fail to make way.                                                         

        d.  Anchorages                                                  
   Finally, Plaintiff-Intervenor argues that because the Secretary of Homeland Security 
has established federal anchorages in Frenchman Bay for purposes of safe navigation, see 
46  U.S.C.  § 70006;  33  C.F.R.  § 110.130,  the  Ordinance’s  regulation  of  onshore 
disembarkation is preempted since large cruise ships with North Atlantic itineraries will 
otherwise have rare occasion to use the anchorages.  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 17–18.  This final 

Supremacy Clause challenge is like the others.  It fails to support an inference of federal 
field preemption expansive enough to blockade local regulation in matters of cruise line 
passenger shore access.  It also fails to expose any actual conflict between federal and state 
law as the Ordinance imposes no restriction whatsoever on Frenchman Bay anchorage 
access.  Cruise ships of whatever size are free to anchor in Frenchman Bay.  If cruise lines 
chose not to anchor in Frenchman Bay because of the Ordinance, that is a function of the 

cruise lines’ own cost and benefit calculations.  By the mere act of establishing anchorages 
the Secretary of Homeland Security has not conferred a charter of privileges on cruise lines 
to disembark their entire complement of passengers in any municipality in which there are 
pier  operators  who  would  welcome  them.    Like  the  other  shots  fired  in  Plaintiff-
Intervenor’s Supremacy Clause fusillade, the final shot fails to sink the Ordinance. 

   2.   The Due Process Clause                                          
   Plaintiffs, but not Plaintiff-Intervenor, claim that the Ordinance offends the Due 
Process Clause.  The Fourteenth Amendment prohibits the States from “depriv[ing] any 
person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law.”  U.S. Const. amend. XIV.  
Around the dawn of the Twentieth Century—an era sometimes described as the “Lochner 

era” by Supreme Court historians—the Supreme Court instilled in the Due Process Clause 
substantive overtones based on a natural-law preoccupation with the freedom to contract.  
Essentially,  if  two  parties  were  willing  to  engage  in  a  commercial  relationship,  an 
expression of their individual liberty, what should stand in their way or interfere with their 
decisions about how to structure the relationship?  According to the Court, not the majority 
of their peers acting through their elected representatives.  See, e.g., Allgeyer v. Louisiana, 

165 U.S. 578 (1897) (invalidating a law regulating marine insurance); Lochner v. New 
York, 198 U.S. 45 (1905) (invalidating a labor law designed to limit the hours worked by 
bakers); Adkins v. Children’s Hosp. of the D.C., 261 U.S. 525 (1923) (invalidating a law 
establishing a board and an investigative and consultative process to establish minimum 
wages for women).                                                         
   When we speak of the Lochner Era’s substantive due process jurisprudence today, 

it is mostly to express bewilderment that the Court engaged in such a freehanded practice 
of  judicial  policymaking  in  favor  of  those  having  commercial  advantage  in  the 
marketplace, or else to extol the noteworthy dissents of the era, such as the work of Justice 
Oliver Wendel Holmes in Lochner and the work of Justice Holmes and Chief Justice 
William Howard Taft in Adkins.  It reminds us, and is worthy of perennial reminding, that 

judicial policymaking is an insidious, antidemocratic, and narcissistic instinct still very 
much alive that must be resisted.  Lessons from the Lochner-era season of judicial mischief 
making that are worthy of mention include the observance that “[t]he 14th Amendment 
does not enact Mr. Herbert Spencer’s Social Statics,” Lochner, 198 U.S. at 75; that a court 
should avoid “pricking out a line in successive cases” when the process is akin to legislative 

policymaking,  Adkins,  261  U.S.  at  562  (Taft,  C.J.,  dissenting);  that  the  substantive 
“contours” of the Due Process Clause are decidedly “vague” in relation to the freedom to 
contract, id. at 568 (Holmes, J., dissenting); that when it comes to liberty “pretty much all 
law consists in forbidding men to do some things that they want to do,” id.; and that 
deciding whether a law’s benefits are worth its costs is a matter assigned to the legislative 
rather than the judicial branch of government, id. at 571.                

   When the Supreme Court finally abandoned using the freedom to contract as an 
antidemocratic talisman, it reaffirmed what a great many of its other decisions had long 
established, summing up the concern over individual liberty as follows:   
   [F]reedom of contract is a qualified, and not an absolute, right.  There is no 
   absolute freedom to do as one will or to contract as one chooses.  The 
   guarantee of liberty does not withdraw from legislative supervision that wide 
   department of activity which consists of the making of contracts, or deny to 
   the government the power to provide restrictive safeguards.  Liberty implies 
   the absence of arbitrary restraint, not immunity from reasonable regulation 
   and prohibitions imposed in the interest of the community.           

W. Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish, 300 U.S. 379, 392 (1937).                  
   And so it comes as something of a surprise that I now consider a due process 
challenge to the Bar Harbor Ordinance that pits the Plaintiffs’ freedom to contract22 against 
restrictions imposed in the interest of the community.  But to their credit, Plaintiffs do not 
come right out and say it.  Instead, they adopt the language of modern due process 
standards, contending that there is no “rational nexus” between the Ordinance’s “purpose 
and standards and the processes . . . employe[ed] to achieve [them].”  Pls.’ Br. at 52 (ECF 
No. 191) (citing Pennell v. City of San Jose, 485 U.S. 1, 11 (1988) (upholding municipal 
rent control ordinance over a due process challenge)).                    
   When it comes to the evaluation of the existence of a rational nexus, “courts should 

22 Plaintiffs have also asserted that the Ordinance unlawfully restrains the non-party cruise lines’ and their 
passengers’ right to travel.  Presumably the freedom to travel is no more sacrosanct than the freedom to 
contract.  I can see no reasons why natural law would elevate one over the other.  Plaintiffs did not assert 
that the Ordinance violates individuals’ right to travel in their complaint; instead, they raised this issue for 
the first time in their post-trial brief in a perfunctory fashion.  Consequently, I do not consider the freedom 
refrain from substituting their regulatory wisdom for that of the legislature.  Vaqueria Tres 
Monjitas, Inc. v. Irizarry, 587 F.3d 464, 483 (1st Cir. 2009).  “[A] court’s Due Process 

inquiry should be satisfied ‘[i]f the laws passed are seen to have a reasonable relation to a 
proper legislative purpose, and are neither arbitrary nor discriminatory.’”  Id. (quoting 
Nebbia v. New York, 291 U.S. 502, 537 (1934)).  “This inquiry should focus on whether a 
program’s  procedures  are  inadequate  or  whether,  overall,  a  program  is  arbitrary, 
discriminatory or irrelevant to a legitimate legislative goal.”  Id. (internal quotation marks 
omitted).                                                                 

   Plaintiffs argue that the Ordinance defies the rational nexus requirement because it 
imposes a strict limit of 1,000 persons per day “for every single day of the year,” without 
accounting for seasonal variation in the congestion experienced in Bar Harbor as the result 
of tourism.  Pls.’ Br. at 53.  In support of their position, Plaintiffs emphasize that Mr. 
Sidman testified that the fixed restriction to 1,000 persons daily was not the product of “a 

rigorously defensible finding or study or calculation,” July 13 Tr. at 312:20–21, and that 
his group “just didn’t want to get into various limits at different times of the year.”  Id. at 
313:24–25.                                                                
   Plaintiffs’ argument is that because Bar Harbor long employed different summer-
season and shoulder-season caps it is now irrational for Bar Harbor to do otherwise.  I am 

not convinced that adopting this rationale would be any different than imposing by judicial 
fiat the rule that a fixed cap is unwise policy and therefore unconstitutional because it fails 
to maximize tourism—because, in effect, it is my opinion or another judge’s opinion that 
the Ordinance’s local benefits are not worth their costs.  That might as well be said about 
fixing a minimum wage or imposing rent control.  It is of course rational to propose that 
passenger caps rise and fall inversely to land-based tourism, but it does not follow that a 
fixed cap is therefore irrational.23  The Constitution “is made for people of fundamentally 

differing views, and the accident of our finding certain opinions natural and familiar, or 
novel,  and  even  shocking,  ought  not  to  conclude  our  judgment  upon  the  question.”  
Lochner, 198 U.S. at 75–76 (1905) (Holmes, J., dissenting).  The Due Process Clause does 
not compel Bar Harbor to eliminate visitation lulls during the shoulder season by means of 
increased cruise ship visitation.  Nor, to my knowledge, does the Due Process Clause forbid 

municipalities  from  enacting  ordinances  that  have  the  effect  of  preserving  seasonal 
fluctuations in the blessings and burdens of tourism.  Though Plaintiffs evidently see it as 
their constitutional right to maximize the burden that their commercial activity imposes on 
the commons, at least up to a level that approaches their capacity to serve, they have not 
cited any authority for that proposition.                                 

   The Ordinance’s 1,000-person daily cap reduces the profit that can be achieved from 
commercial engagement with cruise lines and cruise ship passengers, but it also preserves 
that engagement to a degree.  Is it irrational for the citizens of Bar Harbor to desire a 
passenger cap that enhances their own relative enjoyment of their community during the 
summer and shoulder seasons while maintaining a measure of cruise tourism commerce?  

I cannot say that it is.  If I were to conclude otherwise, I would simply be ratifying the 


23 I am not concerned here with the alleged irrationality of a “year-round” cap because this case does not 
involve year-round cruise ship traffic.  When the Ordinance came into being, the MOAs between the Town 
and the cruise lines involved a season beginning in May and ending in October.  The cruise lines have 
Plaintiffs’ policy preference as being in league with my own, not because the Ordinance is 
discordant with the Due Process Clause.  I adhere to an antiquated notion that judges should 

not allow robes to suffocate a sense of judicial humility by steering wildly outside their 
lane into the role delegated to elected representatives.  Whether the Ordinance is the wisest 
expression of democratic will is a question for which the Constitution does not hold the 
answer.  What may seem like a sensible policy today may strike voters as needing some 
renovation down the road.  This is merely a Schoolhouse Rock-level civics lesson that 
nevertheless bears repeating in constitutional challenges that more appear to challenge the 

marginal wisdom of the law than satisfy the more capacious test of whether it offends the 
Constitution.  Even if I were equipped to play the role of the Oracle of Delphi to answer 
the question of whether the Ordinance is sensible, which I am not, that is not the role 
assigned to me by the Constitution, contemporary trends notwithstanding.  
   Plaintiffs argue that it is discriminatory that the amelioration of congestion falls 

exclusively on them, without imposing restrictions on other accommodations or tourists 
who contribute to the problem.  Based on my review of the record, I am not persuaded that 
the Ordinance discriminates in an irrational manner.  Congestion in Bar Harbor is real and 
is experienced throughout the summer and fall months.  When the Pier Owners and Tender 
LLCs disembark several thousand persons on a daily basis, they substantially burden Bar 

Harbor’s waterfront and intensify the experience of congestion more widely. 
   Cruise line passenger traffic stands out as worthy of special consideration for a 
variety of reasons.  For purposes of this context, among these reasons are the industry’s 
own longstanding selective and voluntary approach to municipal engagement and its 
acknowledged need for management by means of a reservation system that employs caps.  
Land-based  tourism  is  not  equally  amenable  to  management  and  Plaintiffs  have  not 

suggested any ready means of stemming that particular stream of visitation.  Cruise-based 
tourism is also unlike land-based tourism in that cruise ships carry passengers in numbers 
quite unlike any land-based conveyance.  While cruise lines evidently consider local 
conditions in terms of the capacity of the area to provide their passengers with goods and 
services, they are not deterred by local “no vacancy” conditions that would deter land-
based visitors.  Upon arrival, cruise line passengers congregate in volume, in relatively 

intense morning and afternoon waves, though they also enhance congestion throughout the 
day.  When they arrive, they are joined by a caravan of the vehicles that cater to them, 
congesting the waterfront area with buses, minibuses, vans, motor coaches, and taxis.  
Their  arrival  demands  significant  attention  by  municipal  authorities,  mostly  law 
enforcement personnel hired to manage the press of people and conveyances.  Cruise lines 

also have the relatively unique ability to transform the shoulder season, calling in Bar 
Harbor on a near daily basis in especially large cruise ships.  These are distinct features of 
cruise tourism in Bar Harbor that make differential treatment rational.   
   Ultimately, the costs and benefits of the various features of cruise tourism and the 
1000-person daily passenger cap do not boil down to a neat finding of arbitrariness, 

irrationality, irrelevance, or discrimination.  A rational voter could take these features into 
consideration  and  conclude  that  a  1,000-passenger  cap  is  an  appropriate  means  of 
recalibrating the Town’s approach to this very local concern.             
   3.   The Commerce Clause                                             
   Among the powers the Constitution vests in Congress is the power “[t]o regulate 

Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes.”  
U.S. Const. art I, § 8.  The conferral upon Congress of the power to regulate commerce 
clearly authorizes Congress to override competing regulations adopted by the states, but it 
also acts as a bulwark against state and local regulations that would, if permitted to stand, 
either discriminate against foreign and interstate commerce for local protectionist purposes 
or produce a Balkanized system in which commerce among the states and with other 

nations is overburdened by a need to satisfy multifarious regulations imposed by different 
states on the very same commercial activity.  Camps Newfound/Owatonna, Inc. v. Town of 
Harrison, Me., 520 U.S. 564, 571, 576–77 (1997) (concerning discriminatory regulation); 
Bibb v. Navajo Freight Lines, Inc., 359 U.S. 520, 523–530 (1959) (concerning regulation 
inimical  to  the  orderly  movement  of  good  across  state  lines).    The  bulwark  against 

pernicious regulation is varyingly described as the “dormant” Commerce Clause or the 
“negative command” of the Commerce Clause.  Nat’l Pork Producers Council v. Ross, 598 
U.S. 356, 368 (2023).  Judicial decisions discussing the dormant Commerce Clause are 
legion and not all of the precedent fits neatly into the categories outlined above. 
   Plaintiff-Intervenor  breaks  its  argument  into  three  overarching  assertions  with 

subparts.  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 18–44.  The first contention is that the Bar Harbor Ordinance is 
protectionist and discriminatory.  Id. at 22–38.  The second contention is that the burdens 
of the Ordinance far exceed the local benefits.  Id. at 38–43.  The third is that the Ordinance 
violates the Foreign Commerce Clause.  Id. at 43–44.  Plaintiffs, on the other hand, advance 
their position under twelve headings, three of which are prefatory.  Pls.’ Br. at 22–52.  The 
resulting nine arguments cover a similar range of subjects and bounce back and forth 

thematically.  I address Plaintiff-Intervenor’s and Plaintiffs’ arguments together but impose 
my own outline.                                                           
        a.  Discrimination against foreign commerce                     
   “‘[T]he’ Commerce Clause is really three distinct Clauses rolled into one: a Foreign 
Commerce Clause, an Interstate Commerce Clause, and an Indian Commerce Clause.”  
Haaland v. Brackeen, 599 U.S. 255, 320 (2023) (Gorsuch, J., concurring).  Each clause is 

construed to effectuate its purposes, resulting in differing applications.  Id.  Here, the 
contention is that the Ordinance discriminates against foreign commerce because cruise 
lines  conduct  an  international  operation,  some  utilizing  exclusively  foreign-flagged 
vessels, and their vessels frequently call in the ports of two or more nations during a solitary 
tour.  Plaintiffs assert that cruise lines have the right to call on any Class A port that is 

convenient, such as the Port of Bar Harbor, and, consequently, the Ordinance disrupts the 
flow of foreign commerce.  Pls.’ Br. at 51.  Plaintiff-Intervenor agrees, arguing that the 
Ordinance  overwhelmingly  burdens  foreign  commerce  because  the  largest  ships  are 
foreign-flagged, and it is essential that there be uniformity in regulation.  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 
43.                                                                       

   These assertions lack persuasive force.  The Ordinance does not discriminate on the 
basis of a “foreign” attribute.  The Ordinance is indifferent to whether passengers arrive on 
foreign-flagged vessels or are themselves citizens of foreign states.  The Ordinance also is 
silent on the subject of foreign navigation.  The Ordinance imposes a capacity limitation 
on the disembarkation of passengers regardless of the origin of the vessel carrying them or 
the itinerary that informs the vessel’s movements.  The imposition of a restriction on local 

daily disembarkations into a small town does not meddle in an area of commerce that must 
of necessity be ironed out between nations.24                             
   There is no cause to think that the ability of municipalities to govern the extent of 
their participation in cruise tourism for local welfare reasons will undermine the cruise 
tourism industry or result in cruise lines having to modify their vessels, crews, passenger 
capacities or anything else in order to continue plying the seas to visit whatever nations, 

states, and municipalities remain on their itineraries, of which there are, evidently, a great 
many.  If anything, permitting municipalities to establish terms and conditions on local 
participation  in  cruise  tourism  may  encourage  more  municipalities  to  consider 
participation, knowing that they will not thereby be compelled to accommodate whatever 
level of traffic the cruise lines and their local partners wish to impose.  That more ports 

may be open to smaller vessels is to be expected rather than condemned on “constitutional” 
grounds.                                                                  
   The record fails to justify the notion that there is a need for uniformity25 in the terms 
and conditions of municipal partnering with the cruise tourism industry, let alone that 

24 This case is unlike Henderson v. Mayor of the City of New York, in which the Supreme Court struck down 
a state statute that imposed certain financial obligations on ship owners whose ships carried foreign subjects 
migrating to the United States, explaining that the terms of our Nation’s immigration policy, 92 U.S. 259, 
270 (1875), “require exclusive legislation by Congress,” as the subject “in an eminent degree . . . concerns 
our international relations.”  Id. at 273.                                

25 Plaintiffs assert: “No other significant port physically capable of disembarking passengers from similar-
sized vessels restricts disembarkation in the same manner as the Ordinance.”  Pls.’ Br. at 30.  The statement 
not only admits that other ports impose restrictions, but also is so laden with qualifiers that its meaning is 
uncertain.  No party introduced the kind of evidence that would enable me to unpack this assertion, let alone 
uniformity is necessary to foreign (or interstate) commerce.  Congress has not seen fit to 
regulate the terms and conditions of municipality and cruise line engagement and it is not 

at all apparent or even probable that allowing municipalities the ability to regulate their 
level of engagement will undermine the ability of any of the several coastal states to 
participate fully in cruise tourism involving every size cruise ship imaginable and bearing 
whatever flag.  What this case really involves is the contention that cruise lines are able to 
compel local accommodation of their private assessment of the ideal economies of scale 
for cruise tourism.  See Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 30–31; Pls.’ Br. at 26.  The Foreign Commerce 

Clause does not demand such a result.26                                   
        b.   Discrimination-qua-protectionism                           
   At the “very core” of the Supreme Court’s Commerce Clause jurisprudence lies an 
“anti-discrimination principle.”  Nat’l Pork Producers Council, 598 U.S. at 369.  The anti-
discrimination principle “prohibits the enforcement of state laws driven by economic 

protectionism.”  Id. (cleaned up).  Protectionist state and local laws are those that impose 
restrictions or grant benefits that favor in-state or local economic interests and disadvantage 
their out-of-state competitors.  Id.  Such measures are barred by the negative command of 
the dormant Commerce Clause because the alternative would result in the existence of 
state-by-state protectionist initiatives and reprisals that would prevent the operation of a 


26 Cases cited in support of the “foreign commerce” argument are distinguishable.  See Crosby v. Nat’l 
Foreign Trade Council, 530 U.S. 363 (2000) (holding that state law boycotting companies that do business 
with Burma violated Supremacy Clause); United States v. Locke, 529 U.S. 89 (2000) (holding Washington 
law  regulating  oil  tankers  was  preempted  in  part by  comprehensive  federal  regulatory  regime  and 
remanding for further consideration of certain state regulations); Kraft Gen. Foods, Inc. v. Iowa Dep’t of 
Revenue and Fin., 505 U.S. 71 (1992) (invalidating state corporate tax law that gave preferential tax 
treatment  to  dividend-income  received  from  domestic  subsidiaries  versus  dividends  from  foreign 
national,  cohesive  and  competitive  marketplace.    Id.  at  371–73  (discussing  cases 
illustrating this core concern).  Thus:                                   

   We  have  understood  this  construction  to  serve  the  Commerce  Clause’s 
   purpose of preventing a State from retreating into economic isolation or 
   jeopardizing the welfare of the Nation as a whole, as it would do if it were 
   free  to  place  burdens  on  the  flow  of  commerce  across  its  borders  that 
   commerce wholly within those borders would not bear.  The provision thus 
   “‘reflect[s] a central concern of the Framers that was an immediate reason 
   for calling the Constitutional Convention: the conviction that in order to 
   succeed, the new Union would have to avoid the tendencies toward economic 
   Balkanization that had plagued relations among the Colonies and later among 
   the States under the Articles of Confederation.’”                    

Oklahoma Tax Comm’n v. Jefferson Lines, Inc., 514 U.S. 175, 179–80 (1995); see also 
H.P. Hood & Sons, Inc. v. Du Mond, 336 U.S. 525, 539 (1949); Baldwin v. G.A.F. Seelig, 
Inc., 294 U.S. 511, 522 (1935).  The Framers feared interstate commercial strife, not 
impartial regulations enacted for local welfare ends, with which they were no doubt 
familiar.                                                                 
   State and local regulations that are not protectionist in purpose or effect are not 
prohibited by the negative command of the Commerce Clause simply because they impact 
an  out-of-state  economic  interest  associated  with  commerce.    Nat’l  Pork  Producers 
Council, 598 U.S. at 374.  After all, “[i]n our interconnected national marketplace, many 
(maybe most) state laws have the practical effect of controlling extraterritorial behavior,” 
id. (internal quotation marks omitted), including “an immense mass of inspection laws, 
quarantine laws, and health laws of every description that have a considerable influence of 
commerce outside their borders.”  Id. at 375 (cleaned up, quotation marks omitted);27 see 

27 In National Pork Producers Council v. Ross, the Supreme Court rejected a challenge to a California law 
also Camps Newfound/Owatonna, 520 U.S. at 596 (“In our zeal to advance [open markets] 
we must take care not to overstep our mandate, for the Commerce Clause was not intended 

‘to cut the States off from legislating on all subjects relating to the health, life, and safety 
of  their  citizens,  though  the  legislation  might  indirectly  affect  the  commerce  of  the 
country.’” (Scalia, J., dissenting) (quoting Huron Portland Cement Co. v. Detroit, 362 U.S. 
440, 443–444 (1960)).                                                     
   Plaintiffs argue that Bar Harbor’s Ordinance is facially and per se discriminatory 
and protectionist because it impacts only travelers arriving by sea, without attempting to 

regulate the congestive impact of land-based travelers.  Pls.’ Br. at 28 (citing Chem. Waste 
Mgmt., Inc. v. Hunt, 504 U.S. 334, 344 n.6 (1992) (explaining that a per se rule of invalidity 
applies “not only to laws motivated solely by a desire to protect local industries from out-
of-state  competition,  but  also  to  laws  that  respond  to  legitimate  local  concerns  by 
discriminating arbitrarily against interstate trade”).  In Hunt, the Supreme Court struck 

down an Alabama law that imposed fees on the deposit of out-of-state hazardous waste 
(but not in-state hazardous waste) in an in-state commercial landfill, classifying the law as 
a facial violation of the Commerce Clause.  504 U.S. at 336–37.  See Oregon Waste Sys., 
Inc. v. Dep’t of Envtl. Quality of State of Or., 511 U.S. 93, 98–99 (1994) (invalidating 
protectionist surcharge imposed on solid waste trucked from out of state destined for in-

state landfill).  However, unlike these protectionist circumstances, the circumstances here 


to certain standards.  598 U.S. at 365.  The law did not discriminate based on the state or country of origin 
of the pork, but the impact of the law was felt predominantly by producers operating outside of California, 
most if not all of whom want to access California’s enormous marketplace.  Id. at 367.  The Supreme Court 
affirmed  the  dismissal  of  the  case  at  the  pleading  stage  for  lack  of  any  plausible  inference  of  a 
involve a neutral regulation that applies regardless of the state of origin of those passengers 
arriving  after  exhaustion  of  the  1,000-person  limitation.    Additionally,  the  supposed 

preference afforded to land-based travelers is not one that is conditioned on the state or 
national citizenship of land-based travelers.28                           
   The burdens and benefits of Bar Harbor’s Ordinance do not discriminate based on 
the interstate or international character of those persons seeking to participate in the local 
economy.  The burden is not imposed because of the interstate nature of the traffic but 
rather  because  of  various  features  of  that  traffic,  already  discussed,  that  hamper  the 

experience of local welfare.  Like Californians’ decision to prohibit traffic in certain food 
products produced under locally disfavored conditions, Nat’l Pork Producers Council, 598 
U.S. at 363, Bar Harbor’s voters have decided to regulate traffic in persons based on that 
traffic’s distinctive contribution to locally disfavored conditions.  Doing so, they have not 
advanced any discernable local commercial interest.  In fact, a primary consequence of the 

Ordinance is to frustrate local commercial interests.                     
   Nor have the voters of Bar Harbor engaged in a parochial or isolationist exercise.  
They have, instead, engaged in the exercise of imposing a restriction based on their first-
hand experience of the relative deleterious impact of high-volume disembarkations at the 
waterfront while remaining open to the entire world’s visitation.  In both purpose and 

effect, they have acted only to limit the extent to which Bar Harbor must be victim to its 


28 Another oft-cited precedent under the discrimination heading is Hughes v. Oklahoma, 441 U.S. 322 
(1979), in which the Supreme Court invalidated a state law that prohibited the out-of-state sale of locally 
grown minnows, effectively hoarding them for local purchase.  Id. at 336–37.  This case is unlike Hughes.  
own success, while continuing to welcome travelers from every corner of the world.  These 
on-the-ground realities are quite unlike the isolationist and protectionist circumstances 

discussed in the expansive corpus of dormant Commerce Clause jurisprudence. 
   Plaintiffs  and  Plaintiff-Intervenor  persist  by  arguing  that  the  Ordinance  is 
discriminatory and protectionist because it has the effect of favoring hotels and other land-
based overnight accommodations.  They explain that cruise lines are in competition with 
land-based accommodations because they are competing for the patronage of travelers 
seeking to visit a particular destination.  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 35–36; Pls.’ Br. at 28, Pl.-Int.’s 

Reply Br. at 27–28 (ECF No. 199).  However, the Ordinance is not drawn to effectuate an 
advantage for local hoteliers, and I do not find that the Ordinance in fact produces such a 
result.29  I have no evidence from which to draw the conclusion other than the testimony 
of former or current cruise line executives who stated that cruise lines compete in the 
hospitality sector against land-based accommodations for the consumer’s discretionary 

travel dollar.  As interesting as the testimony was, it was reductionist in the extreme.  The 
same comparison might be drawn between two non-Californian producers of pork products 
seeking to place their products in California stores, where one complies with California 
law and the other does not.  Or we might compare a non-Californian producer of pork 
products with a Californian producer of beef products.  In either example, the producers 

compete for dollars directed toward meat consumption, yet that obvious point did not 

29 Plaintiff-Intervenor also argues that the Ordinance is protectionist because reduced waterfront traffic will 
enable the Town to collect more paid parking revenue and because Mr. Sidman stated that he preferred 
smaller ships with their more well-to-do passengers.  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 26.  The paid parking contention is a 
straw grasp and as such does not warrant serious consideration.  As for Mr. Sidman’s personal opinion 
about passengers arriving on smaller ships, there is no evidence to support a finding that his opinion 
inform the Supreme Court’s evaluation of the merits in National Pork Producers Council.  
I can see no reason why it should control here.  Reducing the constitutional inquiry so that 

discrimination is found and heightened standards are imposed whenever one product or 
service is impacted by a regulation but a competing product or service is not is a recipe for 
widescale elimination of state and local regulations impacting the provision of goods and 
services.30                                                               
        c.  Arteries of Commerce                                        
   Finally, the negative command of the Commerce Clause means that state and local 

governments have restricted power to issue legislation or regulations that serve to slow or 
obstruct the flow of commerce.  South Dakota v. Wayfair, Inc., 138 S. Ct. 2080, 2089–90 
(2018).  Obstructions that are protectionist in nature are routinely struck down, as discussed 
in the preceding section.  Like the concern over protectionist measures that stack the deck 
in favor of in-state economic interests, the concern for the health of the Nation’s arteries 

ensures  that  the  Nation  avoids  economic  Balkanization,  meaning  the  isolation  of 
neighboring states into separate economic units.  Id. at 2089.  Unlike discriminatory 
scenarios, classic “free-flow” commerce cases are cases in which a state enacts a law 
evenhandedly to regulate in-state economic activity (e.g., trucking), but does so in a manner 
that prevents operation of the enterprise within the enacting state according to a standard 

observed in neighboring or surrounding states, effectively halting interstate transportation 


30 The argument also disregards the fact that travelers staying in hotels are dispersed throughout the Town 
and Mount Desert Island.  They do not impact the waterfront the same way that cruise lines and their 
passengers do.  Many land-based tourists intent upon visiting Acadia National Park may well avoid Bar 
through that state.  See Kassel v. Consolidated Freightways Corporation of Delaware, 450 
U.S. 662, 671 (1981) (invalidating Iowa law barring trucks longer than 60 feet); S. Pac. 

Co. v. Arizona ex rel. Sullivan, 325 U.S. 761 (1945) (invalidating state law that prohibited 
the operation of interstate trains having more than a certain number of railroad cars).  Less 
common, but similarly concerning cases arise out of a state’s creation of a monopolistic 
enterprise that prohibits competition.  See, e.g., Buck v. Kuykendall, 267 U.S. 307, 315–16 
(1925) (invalidating state law prohibiting common carriers from using highways to carry 
persons  between  Seattle, Washington  and  Portland,  Oregon  without  first  obtaining  a 

certificate of public convenience and necessity from the State of Washington, where 
issuance of a certificate to one carrier for purposes of a given route precluded issuance of 
a certificate to another carrier for the same route).  The Ordinance does not fit into either 
category.                                                                 
   Plaintiffs argue that the Ordinance clogs “the arteries of commerce” by impeding 

“the ability of large cruise ships to move persons from port to port according to itineraries 
that are interstate and frequently international.”  Pls.’ Br. at 26.  They emphasize that cruise 
lines are engaged in the transportation of persons free to travel as they see fit.  Id. at 26–
27.  Plaintiff-Intervenors observe that the Commerce Clause exists in part to ensure open 
access to the facilities of interstate traffic and the free flow of persons and property without 

undue restraint.  Pl.-Int.’s Br. at 19–23.                                
   The record in this case demonstrates that the Ordinance does indeed stem the flow 
of interstate commercial activity by reducing the daily volume of persons disembarked into 
Bar Harbor from cruise ships.  However, the mere fact that a state or local law impedes the 
free flow of commerce does not result in an automatic finding of invalidity.  “State laws 
that ‘regulat[e] even-handedly to effectuate a legitimate local public interest . . . will be 

upheld unless the burden imposed on such commerce is clearly excessive in relation to the 
putative local benefits.’”  Wayfair, 138 S. Ct. at 2091 (quoting Pike v. Bruce Church, Inc., 
397 U.S. 137, 142 (1970)).  The burden-benefit calculus recognizes that, “in the absence 
of conflicting legislation by Congress, there is a residuum of power in the state to make 
laws  governing  matters  of  local  concern  which  nevertheless  in  some  measure  affect 
interstate commerce or even, to some extent, regulate it.”  S. Pac. Co., 325 U.S. at 767.31  

When considering whether local regulation comes within the residuum of state power, 
courts may consider factors such as whether the matter regulated is a localized concern, the 
extent to which the regulation interferes with national commerce, and the incentive at the 
national level to attempt to regulate what would amount to multifarious and diverse local 
concerns.  Id.; Duckworth v. Arkansas, 314 U.S. 390, 394 (1941); see also Sproles v. 

Binford, 286 U.S. 374, 390 (1932) (recognizing “the established principle that in matters 
admitting  of  diversity  of  treatment,  according  to  the  special  requirements  of  local 
conditions, the states may act within their respective jurisdictions until Congress sees fit to 
act.”).  “But ever since Gibbons v. Ogden, [22 U.S. (9 Wheat.) 1 (1824)], the states have 


31 See National Pork Producers Council, 598 U.S. at 375 (recognizing “the usual legislative power of a 
State to act upon persons and property within the limits of its own territory, a feature of our constitutional 
order that allows different communities to live with different local standards” (internal quotation marks and 
citation omitted)); Maine v. Taylor, 477 U.S. 131, 151 (1986) (“The Commerce Clause significantly limits 
the ability of States and localities to regulate or otherwise burden the flow of interstate commerce, but it 
does not elevate free trade above all other values.  As long as a State does not needlessly obstruct interstate 
trade or attempt to place itself in a position of economic isolation, it retains broad regulatory authority to 
protect the health and safety of its citizens and the integrity of its natural resources.” (internal quotation 
not been deemed to have authority to impede substantially the free flow of commerce from 
state to state, or to regulate those phases of the national commerce which, because of the 

need of national uniformity, demand that their regulation, if any, be prescribed by a single 
authority.”  S. Pac. Co., 325 U.S. at 767.32                              
   I reject the contention that the question of a local municipality’s relative tolerance 
of cruise tourism based on local conditions is an aspect of the national commerce that 
requires the national uniformity that only Congress can provide.  There are a great many 
varieties of port facilities and communities that house them.  Cruise tourism, based on the 

record before me, is a function of cruise line and local community collaboration.33  See, 
e.g., Exs. 32 & 161.  It has always proceeded on that basis in Bar Harbor.  See, e.g., Ex. 
260 at 1 (Bar Harbor Cruise Tourism Destination Management Plan, “prepared for the use 
of the Town of Bar Harbor residents, stakeholders, municipal agencies and cruise industry 
partners”).  I have no reason to conclude that it does not proceed on a similar basis 

elsewhere.    The  parties  are  agreed  that  different  municipalities  impose  a  variety  of 
constraints, such as caps and limited cruise ship days, though no party has attempted to 
canvas the variety of measures employed by domestic municipalities for purposes of this 
litigation.34  In any event, this case illustrates that the impact of cruise tourism on local 

32 Gibbons v. Ogden is a formative Commerce Clause decision that struck down a New York enactment 
that granted one company the exclusive right to navigate coastal waters in vessels powered by steam, which 
enactment was in direct conflict with the federal government’s grant of coasting licenses to other steamboat 
owners.  22 U.S. at 221.                                                  

33 For example, Rockland has “a very limited number of slots that it allows for ships over a lower berth 
capacity of 500.”  Ex. 195 at 56.  Rockland permits only “six bookings per year per season unless” it 
“authorize[s] a waiver to add any ships beyond that.”  Id.                

34 This phenomenon may well suggest a nationwide interest among cruise tourism communities to impose 
living conditions is a hyperlocal concern that is not well suited to a one-size-fits-all 
regulatory approach at the federal level.                                 

   Furthermore,  Bar  Harbor  is  regulating  a  “matter[  ]  of  local  concern”  in  both 
“character and effect.”  S. Pac. Co., 325 U.S. at 767.  The history of cruise tourism at Bar 
Harbor demonstrates the unique challenges that cruise tourism imposes on Bar Harbor.  
These challenges gave rise to a democratic effort, where the voters weighed the relevant 
local commercial and noncommercial interests and ultimately adopted the Ordinance.  
Modern-day, board-directed cruise practices (particularly those of foreign-flagged cruise 

lines35)  do  not  allow  much  room  for  smaller  municipalities  to  manage  their  local 
experiences based on daily limits on the number of passengers coming ashore.  Cruise lines 
are utilizing ever larger vessels to achieve unprecedented economies of scale, principally 
for shareholder profit.  At the same time, cruise lines will not call at a port unless the entire 
complement of passengers is permitted to come ashore.36  These characteristics of cruise 

tourism make it unworthy of overly solicitous judicial action that would negate an exercise 
in democratic self-determination that is better informed of existing, localized conditions.  
Nothing in the Constitution dictates municipal obeisance to the economies of scale of cruise 
tourism.  Nor, as far as I can tell, does the dormant Commerce Clause legislate adherence 

perceive in this litigation is not that the several States will enact differing regulations, but rather that they 
will all conclude that divestiture provisions are warranted.”).           

35 The representative voices of cruise tourism offered at trial, like Plaintiffs’ and Plaintiff-Intervenor’s 
briefing, did not speak to a need for moderation but rather have thematically favored catering to the interests 
of the cruise lines with the very largest capacity vessels.  Those cruise lines happen to conduct their trade 
with foreign-flagged vessels.                                             

36 But see Ex. 193 at 8–9.  Chris Martin, Director of Port Operations for Holland America, testified at his 
deposition that Holland America stops at ports that limit the number of passenger disembarkations, such as 
to neoclassical liberalism any more than the Due Process Clause compels observation of 
Mr. Herbert Spencer’s Social Statics.                                     

   In the absence of federal or state law dictating the outcome, reasonable citizens at 
the municipal level will come to different conclusions about the proper balance between 
unabated cruise tourism and relative calm, and the outcome of their democratic process is 
the best measure of the polity’s tolerance in light of local conditions.  For this reason, I 
conclude that non-discriminatory and non-monopolistic state laws and local regulations 
that have the impact of restraining outsize cruise tourism do not deserve per se invalidation 

or a heightened standard of review through which judges rather than citizens become the 
final arbiters of the terms by which cruise tourism will be conducted in every port in the 
Nation.  In other words, “[c]ompelling reasons justify treating these laws differently from 
laws favoring particular private businesses over their competitors.”  United Haulers Ass’n, 
Inc. v. Oneida-Herkimer Solid Waste Mgmt. Auth., 550 U.S. 330, 342 (2007) (relying, in 

part, on Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. v. Massachusetts, 471 U.S. 724, 756 (1985) (“The States 
traditionally  have  had  great  latitude  under  their  police  powers  to  legislate  as  to  the 
protection of the lives, limbs, health, comfort, and quiet of all persons” (internal quotation 
marks omitted))).                                                         
        d.  Burdens versus benefits                                     

   Although  the  Bar  Harbor  Ordinance  “regulates  even-handedly  to  effectuate  a 
legitimate  local  public  interest”  while  imposing  “incidental”  effects  on  commerce,  it 
remains necessary to determine whether “the burden imposed on such commerce is clearly 
excessive in relation to the putative local benefits.”  Pike, 397 U.S. at 142.  Under this 
standard, “the extent of the burden that will be tolerated will . . . depend on the nature of 
the local interest involved, and on whether it could be promoted as well with a lesser impact 

on interstate activities.”  Id.  But even so, “[p]reventing state officials from enforcing a 
democratically adopted state law in the name of the dormant Commerce Clause is a matter 
of ‘extreme delicacy,’ something courts should do only ‘where the infraction is clear.’”  
Nat’l Pork Producers Council, 598 U.S. at 390 (quoting Conway v. Taylor’s Executor, 66 
U.S. (1 Black) 603 (1862)).                                               
   The parties disagree as to whether the Ordinance’s burdens on commerce are clearly 

excessive in comparison to the local benefits.  Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor view the 
Ordinance’s benefits as purely speculative and Bar Harbor’s interest in reducing cruise 
tourism as illegitimate.  On the other hand, Bar Harbor and Mr. Sidman characterize the 
Ordinance as imposing a burden on the cruise industry’s business model rather than on 
interstate commerce.  To the extent that the Ordinance does affect commerce, they argue 

that its burdens are not clearly excessive in relation to the local benefits. 
   I first consider the Ordinance’s burdens on commerce.  There is no doubt that the 
Ordinance will have some effect on commerce since almost 80% of the cruise ships that 
presently visit Bar Harbor have a lower berth capacity in excess of 1,000 and are thus 
unlikely to call at Bar Harbor.37  But it is impossible to predict the Ordinance’s precise 

consequences.  The Ordinance continues to permit the daily disembarkation of persons 
traveling  by  cruise  ship  in  large  numbers,  even  if  those  numbers  are  inadequate  to 


37 As of December 2022, 107 of the 134 cruise vessel calls for the 2023 cruise season were scheduled for 
accommodate most of the cruise ships plying the Atlantic seaboard these days.  Milton 
Friedman and the Chicago school would recoil at the claim made by business interests that 

the free market economy of private actors cannot adapt to the limitation at the Bar Harbor 
waterfront, and who instead seek snug harbor behind a constitutional challenge that strikes 
me as not well fitted to the facts on the ground.  Given the attractiveness of the port of Bar 
Harbor, it is to be expected that cruise enthusiasts intent of reaching Bar Harbor will find 
a cruise line to carry them there.  Some cruise lines already offer suitable vessels with Bar 
Harbor itineraries.  Other cruise lines no doubt will adjust to serve the emerging market 

charted by municipalities interested in following Bar Harbor’s example by accommodating 
cruise tourism subject to more constituency-pleasing passenger caps (something that is 
unlikely to develop so long as cruise lines and their proxies threaten constitutional litigation 
over limited access).  See id. at 385 (plurality opinion) (“But from all anyone can tell, other 
out-of-state competitors seeking to enhance their own profits may choose to modify their 

existing operations or create new ones to fill the void.”).               
   Insofar as the Ordinance causes visitors to travel to Bar Harbor through other means, 
like smaller cruise ships, the Ordinance is best described as burdening the cruise line 
industry’s business model, rather than interstate commerce.  See Exxon Corp. v. Governor 
of  Maryland,  437  U.S.  117,  127  (1978)  (reasoning  that  Maryland’s  law  prohibiting 

petroleum producers from operating retail gas stations in-state did not unduly burden 
commerce because “interstate commerce is not subjected to an impermissible burden 
simply because an otherwise valid regulation causes some business to shift from one 
interstate supplier to another” when “there [was] no reason to assume that their share of 
the entire supply [would] not be promptly replaced” by other companies).  Unfortunately 
for Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-Intervenor, the Commerce Clause does not protect the cruise 

line industry’s “particular structure [and] methods of operation.”  Id.  While the Ordinance 
will  likely  cause  visitation  to  Bar  Harbor  to  decrease,  thereby  affecting  interstate 
commerce, it is impossible to know exactly how many fewer visitors will travel to Bar 
Harbor.  Thus, I conclude that the Ordinance will impose an uncertain burden on interstate 
commerce.                                                                 
   I next consider the Ordinance’s local benefits.  I reject Plaintiffs and Plaintiff-

Intervenor’s arguments that Bar Harbor’s proffered interests in lessening congestion and 
conserving municipal resources are illegitimate.38  Courts have held that similar local 
interests are legitimate in a variety of contexts.  See, e.g., Maine v. Taylor, 477 U.S. 131, 
151 (1986) (“The Commerce Clause significantly limits the ability of States and localities 
to regulate or otherwise burden the flow of interstate commerce, but it does not elevate free 

trade above all other values” [because] States “retain[ ] broad regulatory authority to 
protect the health and safety of its citizens and the integrity of its natural resources.”); 
Memphis v. Greene, 451 U.S. 100, 126–27 (1981) (describing a city’s “decision to reduce 
the flow of traffic” as “legitimate” and the “residential interest in comparative tranquility” 
as “unquestionably legitimate” in analyzing a claim under the Thirteenth Amendment);39 


38 On this point, they rely on Young v. Coloma-Agaran, No. 1:00-CV-00774-HG-BMK, 2001 WL 1677259, 
at *11 (D. Haw. Dec. 27, 2001) (stating that “[e]liminating the presence of tourists from the Bay is not a 
proper reason for the Ban as it directly contradicts the very purpose of the Commerce Clause”), aff’d, 340 
F.3d 1053 (9th Cir. 2003).  The district court cited no authority for this proposition, and while the Ninth 
Circuit affirmed the district court, the Ninth Circuit decided the case on alternative grounds and thus did 
not opine on the Commerce Clause.                                         
Tart v. Massachusetts, 949 F.2d 490, 501 (1st Cir. 1991) (discussing the legitimate local 
interest in promoting public health).  Insofar as the Ordinance reduces the number of 

persons who visit Bar Harbor by cruise ship, the Ordinance commensurably advances Bar 
Harbor’s local interest in lessening congestion—particularly at the waterfront, over which 
the cruise industry will otherwise domineer.  This noneconomic benefit, while not precisely 
measurable, is both real and reasonably well calibrated to ameliorate the particularized 
excesses of modern cruise tourism and how it interfaces with Bar Harbor’s waterfront. 
   In short, the Ordinance imposes some burden on the “free flow” of commerce, but 

that  burden  is  impossible  to  quantify.    The  1,000-person  limitation  is  a  significant 
downshift from the passenger caps previously observed in Bar Harbor.  But that downshift 
also promotes noneconomic interests.40  Bar Harbor with the MOA passenger limits and 
Bar Harbor with the 1,000 daily passenger limit are significantly different places.  The 
voters of Bar Harbor “weigh[ed] the relevant ‘political and economic’ costs and benefits 

for themselves,” and the voters evidently decided that the noneconomic benefits of the 
Ordinance favored adopting it.  Nat’l Pork Producers Council, 598 U.S. at 382 (plurality 
opinion) (quoting Moorman Mfg. Co. v. Bair, 437 U.S. 267, 279 (1978)).  Considering the 


39 The circumstances in Greene gave rise to a lively dissent based on the observation that the interest in 
comparative tranquility can be a pretext for walling off white communities from communities of color.  
Greene, 451 U.S. at 136 (Marshall, J., dissenting).  Unlike Greene, this case has no undertones of invidious 
discrimination.                                                           

40 Plaintiff and Plaintiff-Intervenor see the impact on the movement of vessels and persons as burdens so 
weighty as to compel per se invalidation of the Ordinance.  Obviously, I have not viewed it the same way.  
The lead authority they cite is Edwards v. California, 314 U.S. 160 (1941), in which California attempted 
to minimize the extent to which it would bear the burden of indigent migration secondary to the Dust 
Bowl—a “grave and perplexing social and economic dislocation” (i.e., the greatest natural disaster of our 
Nation’s history), id. at 173.  The analogy between Dust Bowl migration and cruise tourism is strained, to 
intimate “nature of the local interest[s]” involved in Bar Harbor’s decision to limit cruise 
tourism, I cannot say that the Ordinance imposes a burden on commerce that “is clearly 
excessive in relation to the putative local benefits.” Pike, 397 U.S. at 142.41 

                         CONCLUSION                                     
   For the reasons set forth above, I conclude as follows:              
   The challenged Bar Harbor Ordinance, Bar Harbor Code Chapter 125, Article VII, 
Section 125-77, is a lawful exercise of home rule authority under the Maine Constitution 
and is not preempted by state law.                                        

   The Ordinance does not violate the Due Process Clause or the Commerce Clause of 
the United States Constitution.                                           
   The  Ordinance  is  in  part  conflict  preempted  under  the  Supremacy  Clause.  
Specifically, the 1,000-person cap is conflict preempted insofar as seafarer shore access is 
concerned.  But insofar as cruise ship passengers are concerned, the 1,000-person cap 

survives challenge under the Supremacy Clause.                            
   Based on these legal conclusions, judgment will enter for the Town of Bar Harbor 
on Counts II and III of Plaintiffs’ Complaint and on Counts II, III, and IV of Plaintiff-
Intervenor’s Complaint in Intervention.  As for the Supremacy Clause claims stated in the 
first  counts  of  the  Plaintiffs’  Complaint  and  the  Plaintiff-Intervenor’s  Complaint  in 

Intervention, judgment will enter IN PART for the Town of Bar Harbor, as Plaintiff and 


41 Cf. Nat’l Pork Producers Council, 598 U.S. at 382 (plurality opinion) (describing that weighing out-of-
state producers’ costs of compliance against the moral and health interests of California’s residents as “a 
task no court is equipped to undertake” and stating that in “a functioning democracy, policy choices like 
Plaintiff-Intervenor fail to demonstrate cause to invalidate the Ordinance insofar as it 
operates as a restriction on passenger disembarkations, and IN PART for Plaintiff and 

Plaintiff-Intervenor, as they have demonstrated that the Ordinance is partially preempted 
in relation to seafarer shore access, although it is by no means self-evident that any material 
alteration of the legal relationship of the parties has thereby been achieved. 
   SO ORDERED.                                                          
   Dated this 29th day of February, 2024.                               

                                 /S/ Lance E. Walker                    
                                 UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            

                   DISTRICT OF MAINE                                 


ASSOCIATION TO PRESERVE       )                                           
AND PROTECT LOCAL             )                                           
LIVELIHOODS, et al.,          )                                           
                         )                                           
     Plaintiffs,         )                                           
                         )                                           
v.                       )         No. 1:22-cv-00416-LEW             
                         )                                           
TOWN OF BAR HARBOR,           )                                           
                         )                                           
     Defendant.          )                                           


           ORDER ON MOTION TO INTERVENE                              

In this action, Plaintiffs, a group of family-owned limited liability companies, a local 
business league and the Penobscot Bay and River Pilots Association seek declaratory and 
injunctive relief to prevent implementation of Bar Harbor’s recently initiated land use 
ordinance that caps the daily total of passengers who may be disembarked from cruise ships 
on, over, or across property in the Town.  The matter is before the Court on a motion to 
intervene filed by Charles Sidman, a Bar Harbor resident and business owner who seeks 
leave to intervene as a party defendant.  Verified Mot. to Intervene and Alt. Mot. to 
Participate as Amicus Curiae (ECF No. 45).  The motion is opposed by both the Plaintiffs 
and the Defendant.                                                        
                      Background                                     
The matter is presently in the briefing cycle of a motion for preliminary injunction.  
The deadline for the Town to oppose the motion has been continued by agreement of the 
parties to facilitate settlement negotiations that will implement a preliminary injunction by 
stipulation, which voluntary injunction would postpone implementation of the ordinance 

during the pendency of this action and potentially beyond (throughout both the 2023 and 
2024 extended seasons).1  Town’s Obj. at 2 n.2 & 9 (ECF No. 55).          
Through his motion, Mr. Sidman verifies that he has been “adversely affected by 
the influx of cruise ship passengers,” who cause, in his experience, “excessive congestion, 
overcrowding, and inundat[ed] local services, amenities, and attractions.”  Id.  at 1.  Mr. 
Sidman also asserts that the Town is not likely to be a vigorous opponent in this litigation 

over the constitutionality of the Town’s new cruise ship ordinance, which ordinance arose 
from a popular initiative that the Town Council actively opposed.         
Based on my review of the available record, the history of this controversy reflects 
a decidedly pro cruise ship sentiment on the part of the Bar Harbor Town Council.  The 
Town’s Cruise Ship Committee has been chaired by an agent of a principal plaintiff and 

does not appear (at first blush) to have done anything other than foster the growth of cruise 
ship passenger traffic.  Over time, visitations have increased in volume, rather dramatically 
in more recent years.  In 2016, itself a year of significant growth, 117 cruise ships visited 
with a passenger complement of 163,000.  Most (roughly 68%) visited in September and 
October.  As cruise ship visitations steadily swelled (stalling out only during a COVID-19-

induced hiatus), the tide of local sentiment was turning against the cruise ship industry.  
The record contains evidence that the Town and the Plaintiffs were aware of this shifting 

1 In exchange, the Town explains that it is reducing its exposure to claims for money damages.  Bar Harbor’s 
Verified Obj. at 2 n.2 & 9.                                               
tide.  Nevertheless, before the 2022 season, through a “voluntary” system of reserving 
cruise ship visits, the Town authorized cruise ship visits totaling as many as 180,000 

passengers for September and October alone (i.e., more passengers in two months of 2022 
than in the entirety of 2016).                                            
In March 2022, an initiative seeking to curtail the passenger influx was set in motion 
and readily garnered sufficient support to go on the municipal ballot.  In the months leading 
up to the election, the Town actively encouraged the electorate to vote down the initiative.  
By all appearances and representations, the initiative movement and the new ordinance 

have proved quite divisive at the local level.  Despite the Town’s efforts, the initiative 
passed.                                                                   
At present, the Plaintiffs and the Town are attempting to settle the matter of the 
Plaintiffs’ motion for preliminary injunction.  The record strongly suggests to me that the 
effort  must  be  focused  on  protecting  the  2024  season  because  the  initiative  already 

specified that the ordinance’s cap on passenger visits would not be imposed for cruise ship 
reservations accepted by the Harbor Master before March 16, 2022.  Plaintiffs have offered 
sworn  testimony  that  “[c]ruise  lines  generally  create  the  itineraries  for  their  ships 
approximately eighteen to twenty-four months in advance.”  Moody Aff. ¶ 7.  In other 
words, the 2023 season should already be secure.  And while the parties’ effort to stipulate 

a resolution for the 2024 season is timely for purposes of the cruise ship industry’s itinerary 
planning,  they  have  not  provided  any  indication  in  their  filings  that  their  voluntary 
approach  to  settling  the  matter  of  the  preliminary  injunction  involves  any  serious 
compromise in terms of passenger volumes that would be responsive to the expressed will 
of the Town of Bar Harbor’s electorate, even as they insist in briefs opposed to Mr. 
Sidman’s intervention that the Town will vigorously litigate to uphold the ordinance. 

                       Discussion                                    
“On timely motion, the court must permit anyone to intervene who . . . claims an 
interest relating to the property or transaction” if the person “is so situated that disposing 
of the action may as a practical matter impair or impede [his] ability to protect [his] interest, 
unless existing parties adequately represent that interest.”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 24(a)(2).  Known 
as “intervention as of right,” this avenue for intervention in a lawsuit requires that the 

moving party satisfy every requirement (timeliness, interest, threat of impairment, and 
inadequate representation by existing parties).  Victim Rights Law Ctr. v. Rosenfelt, 988 
F.3d 556, 560 (1st Cir. 2021); Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President & Fellows 
of Harvard Coll., 807 F.3d 472, 474 (1st Cir. 2015).  If the moving party cannot meet every 
requirement, then a second avenue for intervention, labeled “permissive intervention,” is 

available if he “has a claim or defense that shares with the main action a common question 
of law or fact.”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 24(b)(1)(B).  It is generally understood that intervention as 
of right “is somewhat more circumscribed” than its permissive cousin, and that there is 
enough distance between them in terms of the rigor of the relative standards for a district 
court to call shots that balance out “idiosyncratic factual settings,” Ungar v. Arafat, 634 

F.3d 46, 51 (1st Cir. 2011), based on a “commonsense view of the overall litigation,” Pub. 
Serv. Co. of New Hampshire v. Patch, 136 F.3d 197, 204 (1st Cir. 1998).   
Turning to the instant motion, no one suggests that Mr. Sidman’s motion is not 
timely.  Instead, they focus their challenge on Mr. Sidman’s interest in the litigation and 

the Town’s ability to adequately represent municipal residents who favor the ordinance.  
Concerning his individualized interest, those opposed to Mr. Sidman’s intervention 
argue that he cannot demonstrate a real or concrete interest beyond the interest of the 
general populace.  I am not convinced by this argument.  To the contrary, Mr. Sidman has 
a concrete personal stake in the alleged harms the ordinance was meant to redress.  Quite 
unlike a party with no skin in the game who seeks to intervene solely to advocate on behalf 

of or against an enactment that is dividing popular opinion across a wide region, state, or 
nation,2 Mr. Sidman is connected to this very localized controversy based on a personal 
investment  in  the  Town  of  Bar  Harbor,  including  an  investment  in  its  commercial 
downtown.  Given this basic reality, it is reasonable to infer that he has a concrete, personal 
stake in the local commons that is impacted by the influx of cruise ship passengers 

throughout an extended season.  This is more than a mere “undifferentiated, generalized 
interest.”  Patch, 136 F.3d at 205.  In this regard, Mr. Sidman’s interest in the litigation and 
that of the members of the Plaintiff Association appear to occupy opposite sides of the very 
same coin.3                                                               


2 That is, quite unlike the circumstances at play in most of the cases cited by Mr. Sidman’s opponents. 

3 Separately, the Town of Bar Harbor insists that Mr. Sidman must also meet the demands of Article III’s 
standing requirements, noting that the First Circuit has not resolved the issue and the existence of a circuit 
split.  Bar Harbor’s Verified Obj. at 6 (citing Mangual v. Rotger-Sabat, 317 F.3d 45, 61 & n.5 (1st Cir. 
2003)). Having found a plausible basis to infer more than an undifferentiated, generalized interest, and 
having based that interest on something other than Mr. Sidman’s mere status as a principal proponent of 
the ordinance, standing does not appear to be an obstacle to Mr. Sidman’s participation.  Cf. United States 
v.  AVX  Corp.,  962  F.2d  108,  118  (1st  Cir.  1992)  (analogous  standing  concern  in  the  context  of 
Those opposed to Mr. Sidman’s intervention also contend that his motion should 
fail because the interest he seeks to represent has an adequate champion: the Town of Bar 

Harbor.  On this issue, Mr. Sidman’s request for intervention as of right is somewhat 
equivocal due to the presumption of adequate representation that arises when the defendant 
is a governmental body.  See Victims Rights Law Ctr., 988 F.3d at 561.  The First Circuit 
holds that a “strong affirmative showing” is needed to successfully rebut the presumption, 
id.,  and  it  has  demonstrated  that  it  will  affirm  an  exercise  of  discretion  that  denies 
intervention  on  this  basis,  even  with  respect  to  permissive  intervention,  id.  at  564.  

However, in this case I find that the request for intervention is appropriate given the Town’s 
history of boosterism for the cruise ship industry.  Indeed, there is a strong showing in the 
record so far adduced that the Town has long given over to one or more agents of the Walsh 
family enterprises (i.e., most of the nominal plaintiffs) what appears (upon first impression) 
to be carte blanche in matters of Bar Harbor’s informal and voluntary cruise ship policy.  

When  added  to  the  fact  of  the  Town’s  opposition  to  the  ordinance  there  arises  an 
idiosyncratic factual setting that supports a commonsense finding in favor of intervention. 
The remaining challenge worthy of comment is the contention that permitting 
intervention will only result in delay because Mr. Sidman’s participation might monkey 


environmental litigation); see also Nergaard v. Town of Westport Island, 2009 ME 56, ¶ 18, 973 A.2d 735, 
741 (“standing has been liberally granted to people who own property in the same neighborhood as the 
property that is subject to a permit or variance”).  Given the plausible scope of the impact of the land use 
in issue, even under Maine law Mr. Sidman appears to have viable standing given his regular actual use of 
the downtown area, his ownership of a business in the vicinity of the use, and the fact that he is among the 
persons whom the ordinance is designed to protect.  See id. ¶¶ 19, 21.  For these reasons, and solely to 
appease the Town’s demand for a finding, I find that Mr. Sidman clears the Town’s standing obstacle, even 
though I am not fully persuaded that such a finding is necessary.         
wrench  an  otherwise  amicable  settlement  of  the  matter  of  the  Plaintiffs’  motion  for 
preliminary injunction.  This challenge is particular to the permissive intervention analysis.  

Rule  24  states:  “In  exercising  its  discretion,  the  court  must  consider  whether  the 
intervention will unduly delay or prejudice the adjudication of the original parties’ rights.”  
Fed.  R.  Civ.  P.  24(b)(3).    Cases  of  this  kind—constitutional  challenges  to  popular 
enactments—typically move along at a much faster clip than standard civil litigation.   
Based on their briefs, the parties already appear to appreciate that this case is no exception. 
I fail to apprehend cause why Mr. Sidman would frustrate that objective, as he makes 

representations to the contrary in his reply brief.  Reply at 4 (ECF No. 62). 
In any event, those opposed to Mr. Sidman’s intervention contend that the interest 
they share in an early and voluntary settlement of the preliminary injunction motion will 
be undermined by Mr. Sidman’s participation, and that but for his intervention their 
agreement as to how best to proceed would dramatically expedite the final resolution of 

proceedings  before  this  Court.    Even  if  accurate,  these  exhortations  are  ultimately 
unpersuasive because they fail to demonstrate that any resulting delay will be excessive or 
disproportionate to the needs of the case or that the existing parties will be prejudiced in 
their ability to secure a timely and complete adjudication of their rights.   
                       Conclusion                                    

Mr. Sidman’s Motion to Intervene (ECF No. 45) is GRANTED.  Mr. Sidman will 
hereafter be recognized as an intervenor-defendant.                       
SO ORDERED.                                                               
Dated this 28th day of February, 2023.                               

                     /s/ Lance E. Walker                        
                    UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE