UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
                   FOR THE DISTRICT OF RHODE ISLAND 
                                           ) 
HARLAN SHABSHELOWITZ,                      ) 
     Plaintiff,                            )                            . 
                                           ) 
     v.                                    ) 
                                           ) 
STATE OF RHODE ISLAND;                     )                  onan. 
DEPARTMENT OF SAFETY; STATE _              )       CA. No. 20-ev-096-JIM-PAS 
POLICE; and LIEUTENANT                     ) 
MICHAEL CASEY, individually and in) 
his capacity as a police officer           ) 
employed by the State of Rhode Island,     ) 
     Defendants.                           ) 
                                           ) 
                                   ORDER 
     Plaintiff Harlan Shabshelowitz, a self-described “middleman” in a real estate 
transaction in Narragansett, Rhode Island between a buyer and seller, paid out and 
received  funds  from  the  sale  of  that  property.   The  eroperry  sale  and  related 
transactions raised red flags for law enforcement, resulting in an investigation and 
grand jury indictments for several individuals, including Mr. Shabshelowitz.  He was 
indicted  on  two  criminal  counts:  obtaining  money  under  false  pretenses  and 
conspiracy to obtain money under false pretenses:  He moved to dismiss those charges 
in state court arguing that Rhode Island State Police Lieutenant Michael Casey, also 
a defendant here, maliciously prosecuted him.  Two state courts denied his motions; 
however, the case ultimately ended with the State dismissing the charges. 
         Shabshelowitz  filed  a  one  count  Complaint  for  malicious  prosecution 
against Defendants State of Rhode Island, Department of Public Safety, Rhode Island 

State Police (collectively,  the “State Police”)  and Lt.  Casey,  individually and in his 
official  capacity  (collectively  “Defendants”).    Defendants  move  for  summary 
judgment, arguing initially that collateral estoppel bars the claim but also that it fails 
on the merits.  ECF No. 58.  Because the Court agrees that Mr.  Shabshelowitz has 
already litigated this claim in state court, collateral estoppel applies and so the Court 
dismisses this action. 
I.     BACKGROUND 
      Eugene  O’Brien  bought  property  at 375  Ocean  Road,  Narragansett,  Rhode 
Island (“Property”)  from  Freddie  Carrozza for  $  2.4 million, with  a mortgage from 
Coastway Credit Union (“Coastway”) for $ 2.28 million.  He secured this financing in 
part based on local realtors Verna Gauthier and Joseph Lyman’s appraisals of the 
Property for $2.4 million, but it appeared that the Property’s actual value was much 
less.  Mr. O’Brien lost the Property to foreclosure after he defaulted on his loan.  It 
was  sold  for  $610,000  nearly  four  years  later,  resulting  in  a  net  loss  of  over 
$1,670,000. 
     The original transaction between Mr. O’Brien and Mr. Carrozza garnered some 
suspicion  in  Narragansett,  prompting  retired  Rhode  Island  State  Police  Officer 
Thomas Denniston and realtor,  John Hodnett of Lila Delman Real Estate, to alert Lt. 
Casey.  Officer  Denniston was  concerned that the  Property was bought by “straw 
buyers”  at  an  inflated price.   Lt.  Casey  launched  an  investigation  and  identified 
several incidents of suspicious activity surrounding the transaction.  He focused not 
only  on  the  purchase  price  and  the  loan  that  secured  the  purchase  which  were 

believed to be overinflated,! but also the back-and-forth of the transaction itself where 
it appears that loan proceeds changed hands freely between Mr. Shabshelowitz and 
other players.  Lt. Casey originally interviewed Ms. Shabshelowitz about his role in 
the real estate transaction, thinking he might be just a witness, but eventually came 
to believe that he played a part in the illegal scheme. 
      Mr. O’Brien was arrested on charges of obtaining money under false pretenses 
and conspiracy to obtain money under false pretenses.  Soon after, the Rhode Island 
Attorney General assembled a grand jury and presented evidence about the mortgage 
fraud in connection with the  sale.  During those proceedings,  the  State presented 
testimony from Lt.  Casey? and other State Police detectives, over 250 exhibits, and 
an Affidavit of unindicted co-conspirator David Gauthier, who provided details of the 

      1 Because this suit deals only with whether the State maliciously prosecuted 
Mr.  Shabshelowitz  and  this  motion  is  based  on  collateral  estoppel,  the  Court 
expresses no opinion on the merits of the underlying state case rising from the real 
estate  transaction.   Therefore,  the  Court’s  factual  recitation  of  the  underlying 
criminal case is purposefully brief. 
      2 Lt. Casey’s investigation consisted of, in part: researching the Narragansett 
land  evidence  records  and  obtaining  the  loan  files;  reviewing  emails  between 
Mr. Hodnett  and  closing  attorney,  Marc  Greenfield,  at  the  time  of  the  sale  in 
September  2006,  where  Mr.  Hodnett  predicted  that  the  Property  would  likely 
foreclose; interviewing two licensed realtors who opined that, at the time of sale, the 
value of the Property was “at best” between $900,000 and $1,000,000; interviewing 
the highest bidder on the Property before the sale who, upon confirming his offer for 
$900,000,  opined that the Property was a “mess” and that he intended to raze the 
residence to build a new one if his bid was successful; interviewing the Narragansett 
Tax Assessor, John Majeika, about a tax appraisal done by Appraisal Resources that 
assessed the Property at a value close to Mr. O’Brien’s purchase price who noted that 
the value in the appraisal letter sent to Mr. Carrozza was not only indefensible, but 
that he never saw or approved the letter, to which his signature was affixed, before 
it was sent. 

sale and Mr. Shabshelowitz’s involvement.  After thirteen months of proceedings, the 
grand jury indicted Mr. Shabshelowitz. 
      Following his indictment,  Mr.  Shabshelowitz moved to  dismiss the criminal 
charges against him, accusing Lt. Casey of misconduct in the grand jury proceedings. 
He claimed that the State was guilty of prosecutorial misconduct because it presented 
false evidence that led to the decision to indict, tampered with a tape of his interview 
with Lt. Casey, identified a document as false, and withheld an insurance appraisal 
that matched the mortgaged value.’  A state court Magistrate rejected his arguments 
and he  appealed to  Rhode  Island Superior  Court,  where  an Associate Justice  also 
denied his motion to dismiss the indictment.  The indictment stood but eventually 
the Attorney General dismissed all charges against Mr.  Shabshelowitz as part of a 
larger plea bargain deal with other co-conspirators. 
      Mr. Shabshelowitz filed this Complaint against the Rhode Island State Police 
and  Lt.  Casey,  in  his  official  and  individual  capacities,  under  the  Fourth  and 
Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, actionable pursuant to 
   U.S.C. § 1983, and Article I, § 6 of the Rhode Island Constitution.  He alleges that 

     3  The  grand  jury  heard  about  three  appraisals—-the  two  that  supported 
Mr. O’Brien’s $2.4 million loan and one from Andolfo Appraisal Associates, who the 
Rhode Island Attorney General hired, to perform a forensic appraisal review of two 
 supportive appraisals contained within Coastway’s loan file.  Andolfo found neither 
of the  appraisals  to  be  defensible  or  credible.   The  third  appraisal  from  Chubb 
Insurance,  which  the  grand jury  did  not learn  about,  was  for  replacement value, 
considering the  purchase  price  rather than  actual value.  Additionally,  Lt.  Casey 
testified that he did not learn of the Chubb appraisal until this litigation; he did not 
present this evidence to prosecutors and/or the grand jury because he did not have it. 

Lt.  Casey manipulated evidence presented to the  grand jury about the  Property’s 
value and withheld exculpatory evidence.  Defendants move for summary judgment. 
 ECF No. 53. 
I.     STANDARD OF REVIEW 
      When making a summary judgment determination, the Court must review the 
entire record and consider the facts and inferences in the light most favorable to the 
nonmoving party.  Cont? Cas.  Co.  v.  Canadian Univ. Ins.  Co., 924 F.2d 870, 373 (1st 
Cir. 1991).  Federal Rule of Procedure 56(a) dictates that summary judgment should 
be granted if “the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material 
fact and the, movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.”  A genuine dispute 
of material fact is an issue that “may reasonably be resolved in favor of either party.” 
Anderson  v.  Liberty Lobby,  Inc.,  477 U.S.  242,  250 (1986).  A dispute is “genuine” 
when “the evidence  about the fact is such that a reasonable jury could resolve the 
point in favor of the nonmoving party.”  Aivera-Muriente v. Agosto-Alicea, 959 F.2d 
349,  352 (1st Cir.  1992) (citing  United States v.  One Parcel of Real Prop., 960 F.2d 
200, 204 (1st Cir. 1992)).  If there is a genuine dispute of a material fact, that dispute 
would “need[ ] to be resolved by a  trier of fact.”  Doe v.  Tr. of Bos.  Coll., 892 F.3d 67, 
79 (Ast Cir. 2018) (citing Kelley v. LaForce, 288 F.3d 1, 9 (1st Cir. 2002)). 
II.    DISCUSSION 
     Two Rhode Island state courts denied Mr. Shabshelowitz’s motion to dismiss 
his state charges, rejecting his arguments that his indictment was procured by fraud 
and misconduct.  Now Defendants ask this Court to give these state court judgments 

preclusive effect under the doctrine of collateral estoppel.  Alternatively, Defendants 
also  move  on  the  merits.   Because  a  determination  that  Mr.  Shabshelowitz  has 
litigated this claim in state court bars his suit here is dispositive, the Court will begin 
there. 
      Collateral Estoppel 
      “[C]ollateral estoppel bars re-litigation of any issues that were, or could have 
been, brought in a previous action for which judgement was rendered.”  Niitiez Colén 
v.  Toledo-Daévila,  648  F.3d  15,  19  (Ist  Cir.  2011)  (citing  Barreto—Rosa  v.  Varona— 
Mendez,  470  F.3d  42,  45  (1st  Cir.  2006)).   “This  policy helps  to  conserve judicial 
resources,  relieve parties of the burden of re-litigating settled issues,  and prevent 
inconsistent rulings.”  Wade v. Brady, 460 F. Supp. 2d 226, 239 (D. Mass. 2006) (citing 
Allen v. McCurry, 449 U.S. 90, 94 (1980)).  “Collateral estoppel is typically applied by 
federal courts to issues that have been previously litigated in state court in order to 
promote comity between state and federal courts.”  Jd; Johnson v. Mahoney, 424 F.3d 
83, 93 (1st Cir. 2005). 
      Collateral estoppel  “requires:  (1)  an identity of issues;  (2)  a valid  and final 
judgment on the merits; and (8) establishing that the party against whom collateral 
estoppel  is  asserted  was  a  ee  or  in  privity  with  a  party  to  the  prior  action.” 
Wiggins  v.  Rhode Island,  326  F.  Supp.  2d  297,  303  (D.R.I.  2004)  (citing  State  v. 
Santiago,  847 A.2d 252,  254  (R.I.  2004)).  “The  identity of the  issues need not be 
absolute; rather, it is enough that the issues are in substance identical.”  Manganella 
v.  Evanston Ins.  Co.,  700  F.3d  585,  591  (st  Cir.  2012).   “As  the  Restatement  of 

Judgments points out, when a party has litigated such an ‘ultimate fact,’ and failed, 
‘new  evidentiary  facts’  may  not  be  brought  forward  to  obtain  a  different 
determination of that ultimate fact.”  DeCosta v.  Viacom Int’, Inc., 981 F.2d 602, 611 
(1st Cir. 1992) (quoting Restatement (Second) of Judgments § 27, cmt. c.). 
      While Mr. Shabshelowitz raises thin arguments that Defendants have not met 
-  the  second  and  third  elements,  the  Court  finds  from  the  record  that  they  have. 
Because the main discussion points are based on the identity of issues element, the 
Court focuses its analysis there. 
      Identity of Issues 
      Mr. Shabshelowitz’s claim in state court and here is for malicious prosecution.4 
Essentially, Mr. Shabshelowitz argues that the issues raised and resolved in the state 

      4 To recover damages for malicious prosecution,  a party must “prove that (1) 
defendants initiated a prior criminal proceeding against him,  (2) they did not have 
probable  cause  to  initiate  such  a  proceeding,  (3)  the  proceeding  was  instituted 
maliciously, and (4) it terminated in [plaintiffs] favor.” Solitro v. Moffatt,  523 A.2d 
858,  861-62  (R.I.  1987)  (citing Nagy v.  McBurney,  392 A.2d  365  (1978)).  Because 
malicious prosecution cases are disfavored as they may deter prosecutors from doing 
their jobs, Solitro, 523 A.2d at 862 (citing Powers v.  Carvalho, 368 A.2d 1242 (1977)), 
a plaintiff must establish “clear proof’ of malice and lack of probable cause.  Soares 
v. Ann  & Hope of Rhode Island, Inc., 687 A.2d 339, 345 (R.I. 1994) (citing Solitro, 523 
A.2d at 862). 
     The Rhode Island Supreme Court “declared that when the plaintiff was bound 
over by a court and indicted by the grand jury, satisfactory evidence of probable cause 
was established.”  A// v. Rhode Island State Emp. Ret. Bd., 935 A.2d 608, 618 (R.I. 
2007) (citing Giusti v. Del Papa, 33 A. 526 (1896)).  Myr. Shabshelowitz was indicted 
so in order “[tlo rebut  a presumption of probable  cause  arising from  a  grand jury 
indictment,  [he]  must  allege  some  additional fact showing fraud,  perjury,  or other 
undue  means.”   /d.  at  613-14.  “If the  allegation is  unsupported  by  clear proof of 
malice, then it is refuted by the fact that the plaintiff actually was indicted by a grand 
jury.”  Jd, at 614.                          . 

case are not identical to those he pleads here.  Yet a closer review of the record leads 
the Court to disagree. 
      In  his  state  motions,  Mr.  Shabshelowitz  argued  that  the  State  engaged  in 
about twenty instances  of prosecutorial misconduct,  including the  presentation of 
false  and manipulated evidence.  He thoroughly litigated and challenged whether 
Lt. Casey and the other prosecution witnesses were being truthful and whether their 
investigation  was  thorough  as  to  the  Property  values  evidence.   Specifically,  he 
claimed that the State presented false evidence, tampered with a tape of his interview 
with Lt. Casey, identified a document as false, and withheld an insurance appraisal 
that tracked the mortgaged value.  Mr. Shabshelowitz argued that, but for Lt. Casey’s 
presentation of “flagrant, egregious and prejudicial” evidence, he would not have been 
indicted. 
      In  his  hearing  on  the  motion  before  a  Superior  Court  Magistrate  Judge, 
Mr. Shabshelowitz  testified  that  Lt.  Casey  manipulated  a  tape  recording  of his 
testimony in addition to other evidence attacking both the sufficiency and integrity 
of  the  evidence  supporting  probable  cause.   After  hearing  all  the  evidence,  the 
Magistrate  Judge  held  that  his  claim  that  the  State  indicted  him  because  of 
prosecutorial  misconduct were  “without  merit.”  He  appealed this  decision to  the 
Rhode  Island  Superior  Court  where  that  court  reviewed  the  record  de  novo  and 
determined that Mr. Shabshelowitz “hald] not presented evidence of any misconduct 
by the  prosecutor that rose  to  the  level of justifying dismissall,]” which would be 
“appropriate only if ‘it is established that the violation substantially influenced the 

grand jury’s decision to indict’ or if there is ‘grave doubt’ that the decision to indict 
was  free  from  substantial  influence  of such  violations.”   The  state  courts  heard 
considerable  testimony  from both  sides before  finding that there  was  not  enough 
evidence to find that Lt.  Casey and others maliciously prosecuted this case against 
Mr. Shabshelowitz. 
      Here, Mr. Shabshelowitz relies on the same issues and evidence to argue that 
the grand jury would not have indicted him without Lt. Casey’s false information and 
malicious prosecution.  For example, Mr. Shabshelowitz alleges in his Complaint that 
during the  grand jury proceedings “Defendant Casey withheld and/or manipulated 
exculpatory evidence related to the Plaintiffs involvement in the  2006 transaction 
and his receipt of monies from same” and that the “exculpatory evidence withheld 
and/or  manipulated  by  Defendant  Casey,  if presented  truthfully  and  accurately, 
would not have  risen to  the  level  of probable  cause  needed in order to  indict the 
Plaintiff.”  ECF No. 26    20, 22.  He also acknowledges that, “In his supplemental 
motion to dismiss, i Plaintiff stated that the Defendants ‘presented false evidence 
to the grand jury and because its principal witness [Defendant Casey], either lied or 
misrepresented facts, to the grand jury.”  Jd   30.  Mr. Shabshelowitz further alleges 
in his Complaint that “Defendant Casey represented that the March 9, 2006, letter 
from the Town of Narragansett was ‘false, fraudulent, and forged,” “[a] State xine 
entitled  ‘History  of  375  Ocean  Road’  was  materially altered,”  and  “[t]here  is  a 
mandatory insurance binder(s) [the Chubb appraisal] missing that contained a $2.5 
million valuation(s) of the Narragansett Property.”  Jd § 2le.  The Court finds that 

the issues Mr. Shabshelowitz raised in state court are “in substance identical” to the 
issues raised here, Manganella, 700 F.3d at 591, so the identity of issues element of 
collateral estoppel has been satisfied.                                          □ 
      “In order to use the doctrine of collateral estoppel defensively, as Defendants 
purport to here, it must be clear that the party opposing its usage had a  ‘full and fair 
opportunity to litigate an issue’ in a prior lawsuit.”  Wiggins v. Rhode Island, 326 F. 
Supp.  2d 297,  308 (D.R.I. 2004)  (citing Standefer v.  United States,  447 U.S.  10,  24 
(1980)));  State  v.  Wiggs,  635 A.2d 272,  276  (R.I.  1973)  (collateral estoppel applies 
when plaintiff “had a full and fair opportunity to present evidence and call witnesses” 
in the state action).  Mr. Shabshelowitz had a  full evidentiary hearing in which the 
court  heard  his  testimony  and  that  of Narragansett  Town Assessor  Majeika  and 
Appraisal Resources President Richard Berlinsky.  And Mr.  Shabshelowitz did not 
appeal the Superior Court decision; “failure to appeal an adverse judgment negates 
the preclusive effect of that judgment only when review was unobtainable ‘as a matter 
of law.’ Where review is available but is not sought, estoppel applies.”  Wiggins, 326 
F.  Supp.  2d  at  305  (citing Pinkney v.  Keane, 920  F.2d  1090,  1096  (2d  Cir.  1990) 
(citation omitted)). 
     Mr. Shabshelowitz litigated his malicious prosecution claim in state court and 
failed.  Because he has “litigated such an ‘ultimate fact,’ and failed, ‘new evidentiary 
facts’ may not be brought forward to obtain a different determination of that ultimate 
fact.”  DeCosta, 981 F.2d at 611.  The Court finds that collateral estoppel applies and 
grants Defendants’ motion for summary judgment. 

III.    CONCLUSION 
     Mr.  Shabshelowitz  fully  litigated  his  malicious  prosecution  claim  in  state 
court, lost, and decided not to appeal.  Because the issues in state court are identical 
to those brought here (and there was a final disposition and the parties are the same), 
collateral estoppel bars him from re-litigating a claim he  already lost.  The  Court 
GRANTS Defendants’ Motion for Summary Judgment.  ECF No. 538. 

ITIS SO PRDERED.   fy / ff   athaf        

       A  SEPA    PM   YE   fT     ff  if
  pee | A    y       #   wo       A  AY     Ye 
John J. McConnell, Jr.                   
Chief United States District  Judge 
July 22, 2024