U-S<DISTRIGT COURT 
                                                          DISTRIGTOF, VERMONT 
                    UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT          FILED 
                                 FOR THE                               □ 
                          DISTRICT OF VERMONT         2072 HAR 30  PIM □□ 47 
                                                                 Ct   
ROBERT E. SHAPIRO,                           ) 
                                            )                  Hales TELERK 
           Plaintiff,                       ) 
                                            ) 
     V.                                     )      Case No. 2:19-cv-000238 
                                            ) 
UNITED STATES SOCIAL SECURITY                ) 
ADMINISTRATION,                              ) 
                                            ) 
           Defendant.                       ) 
                              ENTRY ORDER 
GRANTING IN PART AND DENYING IN PART PLAINTIFF’S MOTION FOR 
              REASONABLE ATTORNEYS’ FEES AND COSTS 
                                  (Doc. 37) 
     Plaintiff Robert E. Shapiro brings this suit pursuant to the Freedom of Information 
Act (“FOIA”) against the United States Social Security Administration (“SSA”), arising 
from its alleged failure to adequately respond to his FOIA request. Pending before the 
court is Plaintiff's motion for reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs, (Doc. 37), which SSA 
opposes (Doc. 38). Plaintiff seeks an award of $20,525.50 in attorneys’ fees and 
$3,352.50 in costs. 
     Plaintiff is represented by Emily J.  Joselson, Esq. and Justin G. Sherman, Esq. 
Assistant United States Attorney  Jason M. Turner represents SSA. 
I.     Procedural Background. 
     On March 8, 2021, the court issued an Opinion and Order granting in part and 
denying in part SSA’s motion to dismiss or, in the alternative, for summary judgment. 
The court found that SSA waived its exhaustion defense by failing to timely respond to 
Plaintiff's FOIA request. The court also granted Plaintiff's motion for a refund of 
$2,908.00 in fees he paid to SSA because the court found SSA’s failure to timely respond 
to Plaintiff's FOIA request precluded it from charging a fee. The court nonetheless held 
that Plaintiff's FOIA request was unreasonably broad and burdensome and granted 

summary judgment in favor of SSA on that issue. 
     The court deferred judgment on Plaintiff's request for attorneys’ fees and costs, 
stating: “Defendant offered Plaintiff no explanation as to why the withheld documents 
were supported by FOIA exemptions and offers no explanation to this court. Until it does 
so, the court cannot evaluate whether its first response to Plaintiff's FOIA request 
wrongfully withheld responsive documents.” (Doc. 25 at 18.) The court ordered SSA to 
provide an explanation for its initial withholding of responsive documents pursuant to 
Exemptions 5 and 6. SSA complied with this Order and submitted descriptions of the 
withheld documents and the bases for withholding supported by an affidavit. 
     On December 10, 2021, the court issued an Opinion and Order finding that SSA’s 
initial withholding of responsive documents was justified under Exemption 5. Plaintiff 
succeeded in obtaining a refund of his FOIA fees and a detailed explanation for SSA’s 
withholdings of responsive documents. The court found Plaintiff had “substantially 
prevailed” for the purposes of attorneys’ fees under the Supreme Court’s “generous 
formulation of the term” whereby “plaintiffs may be considered prevailing parties for 
attorney’s fees purposes if they succeed on any significant issue in litigation which 
achieves some of the benefit the parties sought in bringing suit.” Farrar v. Hobby, 506 
U.S. 103, 109 (1992) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
     Because the court found that Plaintiffs interests in bringing the FOIA request 
were “scholarly and sought to improve access to benefits for people with disabilities[,]” 
and because SSA had engaged in “obdurate behavior[,]” the court held that “a partial 
award of reasonable attorney’s fees and costs to Plaintiff is warranted.” (Doc. 36 at 15- 
16) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). The court ordered Plaintiff to 
“submit a statement of reasonable attorney’s fees and costs incurred in this case, 
supported by an affidavit,” and “identify the fees and costs expended on the issues on 
which he prevailed.” Jd. at 17. On January 10, 2022, Plaintiff submitted a response. SSA 
filed its opposition on January 24, 2022, and Plaintiff replied on February 7, 2022. 
II.    Conclusions of Law and Analysis. 
     FOIA provides that “[{t]he court may assess against the United States reasonable

attorney fees and other litigation costs reasonably incurred in any case under this section 
in which the complainant has substantially prevailed.” 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(4)(E)(i). In its 
December 10, 2021 Opinion and Order, the court determined Plaintiff had substantially 
prevailed on several issues and was entitled to a partial award of fees. “[A] court 
determines whether the fee requested by an eligible and entitled applicant is 
‘presumptively reasonable’ under the lodestar approach generally applied to fee 
applications in the Second Circuit.” N.Y.  Times Co. v. C.I.A., 251 F. Supp. 3d 710, 713 
(S.D.N.Y. 2017). 
     The “presumptively reasonable fee” is “the product of a reasonable hourly rate and 
the reasonable number of hours required by the case[.]” Millea v. Metro-N. R.R. Co., 658 
F.3d 154, 166 (2d Cir. 2011) (citing Arbor Hill Concerned Citizens Neighborhood Ass’n 
v. Cnty. of Albany, 522 F.3d 182, 183 (2d Cir. 2008) (internal quotation marks omitted); 
Perdue v. Kenny A. ex rel.  Winn, 559 U.S. 542, 552 (2010)). The presumption of 
reasonableness is “strong[,]” and the presumptively reasonable fee can be adjusted only 
in “rare and exceptional circumstances.” Perdue, 559 U.S. at 552 (internal quotation 
marks and citations omitted). “[T]he fee applicant bears the burden of establishing 
entitlement to an award[.]” Hensley v. Eckerhart, 461 U.S. 424, 437 (1983). 
     Because fee-shifting statutes provide little incentive to negotiate rates prior to 
litigation, the court “bears the burden of disciplining the market” and setting a 
“reasonable hourly rate” for the services of counsel. Arbor Hill, 522 F.3d. at 184. “The 
reasonable hourly rate is the rate a paying client would be willing to pay[,] . . . bear[ing] 
in mind that a reasonable, paying client wishes to spend the minimum necessary to 
litigate the case effectively.” Jd. at 190. The “touchstone” of fee-shifting statutes is “that 
district courts should award fees just high enough to attract competent counsel.” Simmons 
v. N.Y. City Transit Auth y, 575 F.3d 170,  176 (2d Cir. 2009) (internal quotation marks, 
emphasis, and citations omitted); accord Perdue, 559 U.S. at 552 (“[A] ‘reasonable’ fee 
is a fee that is sufficient to induce a capable attorney to undertake the representation of a 
meritorious . . . case.”). 
      In determining the reasonable hourly rate, the court must consider case-specific

variables, including: 
     [T]he complexity and difficulty of the case, the available expertise and 
     capacity of the client’s other counsel (if any), the resources required to 
     prosecute the case effectively (taking account of the resources being 
     marshaled on the other side but not endorsing scorched earth tactics), the 
     timing demands of the case, whether an attorney might have an interest 
     (independent of that of his client) in achieving the ends of the litigation or 
     might initiate the representation himself, whether an attorney might have 
     initially acted pro bono (such that a client might be aware that the attorney 
     expected low or non-existent remuneration), and other returns (such as 
     reputation, etc.) that an attorney might expect from the representation. 
Arbor Hill, 522 F.3d at 184. Other relevant case-specific variables include: 
     (1) the time and labor required; (2) the novelty and difficulty of the 
     questions; (3) the level of skill required to perform the legal service 
     properly; (4) the preclusion of employment by the attorney due to 
     acceptance of the case; (5) the attorney’s customary hourly rate; (6) 
     whether the fee is fixed or contingent; (7) the time limitations imposed by 
     the client or the circumstances; (8) the amount involved in the case and the 
     results obtained; (9) the experience, reputation, and ability of the attorneys; 
     (10) the “undesirability” of the case; (11) the nature and length of the 
     professional relationship with the client; and (12) awards in similar cases. 
Id. at 186 n.3 (citing Johnson v. Ga. Highway Express, Inc., 488 F.2d 714, 717-19 (Sth 
Cir. 1974)); see also id. at 190 (“In determining what rate a paying client would be 
willing to pay, the district court should consider, among others, the Johnson factors[.]’”). 
The court may “rely in part on the judge’s own knowledge of private firm hourly rates in 
the community[.]” Miele v. New York State Teamsters Conf. Pension & Ret. Fund, 831 
F.2d 407, 409 (2d Cir.  1987). 
     Plaintiff seeks hourly rates of $185 for Attorney Sherman, an associate at 
Langrock Sperry & Wool, LLP (“Langrock’’), and $270 for Attorney Joselson, a partner 
at Langrock. In connection with the pending motion, Plaintiff proffered the affidavit of 
Attorney Sherman, wherein he averred that these were the customary hourly rates 
charged by Langrock at the commencement of its representation of Plaintiff in 2019. 
“The SSA does not object to the hourly rates proposed by Plaintiff[,]” (Doc. 38 at 3), and 
this District recently found hourly rates of $225 for Attorney Sherman and $350 for 
Attorney Joselson to be reasonable. See Order on Amount of Attorneys Fee at 4, Sullivan

v. Saint-Gobain Performance Plastics Corp., No. 5:16-cv-125 (D. Vt. May 10, 2021), 
ECF No. 446. Considering the nature, complexity, and desirability of the case; the skills 
required; the experience of counsel; awards in other cases in Vermont; and the court’s 
own assessment of market rates in Vermont, the court holds that the reasonable hourly 
rates for Attorney Sherman and Attorney Joselson in this case are $185 and $270, 
respectively. 
     In determining a reasonable number of hours, “[h]ours that are not properly billed 
to one’s client also are not properly billed to one’s adversary pursuant to statutory 
authority.” Hensley, 461 U.S. at 434 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted) 
(emphasis in original). Plaintiff requests fees for 108.95 hours, representing 104.60 hours 
billed by Attorney Sherman and 4.35 hours billed by Attorney Joselson. Plaintiff has 
explained how the hours were attributed to the various phases of this case—pleading 
(14.3 hours), summary judgment (50.75 hours), exemptions (26.8 hours), and attorneys’ 
fees (17.1 hours)—but has not provided contemporaneous billing records or task-related 
expenditures. There is thus no way of discerning whether the hours expended were 
reasonable or are attributable to issues on which Plaintiff prevailed. 
     While SSA “concede[s] that the total amount of hours spent on the litigation by 
Plaintiff's counsel does not appear unreasonable[,]” (Doc. 38 at 3), this determination 
cannot be made without an independent review of the billing records. Because no billing 
records were submitted and Plaintiff achieved only limited success, SSA asks that 
Plaintiff's requested fees be reduced between fifty and seventy percent. 
     A fees claimant is responsible for “documenting the appropriate hours expended” 
as well as “maintain[ing] billing time records in a manner that will enable a reviewing 
court to identify distinct claims.” Hensley, 461 U.S. at 437. “Plaintiff's counsel, of 
course, is not required to record in great detail how each minute of his time was 
expended. But at least counsel should identify the general subject matter of his time 
expenditures.” Jd. at 437 n.12. ““Where the documentation of hours is inadequate, the 
district court may reduce the award accordingly.” Jd. at 433. 
     The reasonable number of hours must also reflect the degree of success obtained.

“{I]n cases where plaintiffs have not achieved complete success[,]” the “most critical 
factor is the degree of success obtained.” Texas State Tchrs. Ass’n v. Garland Indep. Sch. 
Dist., 489 U.S. 782, 789 (1989) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Attorney 
Sherman avers that Langrock excluded 7.35 hours “as not being related to their success 
and the benefits obtained[,]” (Doc. 37-2 at 3, § 16), but Plaintiff otherwise requests an 
award representing all hours counsel expended at each stage of litigation because 
“Plaintiff had to prevail at... [each] stage before the next phase of the case, and so all 
the hours expended should be counted.” (Doc. 37-1 at 8.) As SSA points out, this fails to 
comply with the court’s December 10, 2021 Opinion and Order which required Plaintiff 
to “identify the fees and costs expended on the issues on which he prevailed.” (Doc. 36 at 
17.) 
     To account for Plaintiff's partial success, the court may “exercise [its] equitable 
discretion . .  . to arrive at a reasonable fee award, either by attempting to identify specific 
hours that should be eliminated or by simply reducing the award to account for the 
limited success of the plaintiff.” Texas State Tchrs. Ass’n, 489 U.S. at 789-90 (citation 
omitted). Because the billing records lack the specificity necessary to identify specific 
hours to be eliminated, the court must adopt the latter approach. The court agrees with 
SSA that a reduction of fifty percent is required based upon Plaintiffs limited success 
and failure to achieve his ultimate objective in this suit—production of the responsive 
withheld records. As the court noted: 
     Plaintiff did not prevail on the central issue of his case, obtaining the 
     release of the requested records or establishing that SSA wrongfully 
     withheld them. However|,] . . . Plaintiff established that SSA’s response to 
     his document request was untimely and unsupported by adequate 
     explanation. He sought and obtained a judicial order requiring SSA to 
     refund his FOIA fees. In addition, the court’s order required defendant to 
     undertake an action—to explain the reasons for its withholdings—and 
     imposed a date certain for when that action must be completed. 
(Doc. 36 at 14) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
     In light of the Plaintiffs limited success and inadequate documentation of hours, 
the requested hours will be reduced across the board by fifty percent. See Hardy v.

Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms & Explosives, 293 F. Supp. 3d 17, 31 (D.D.C. 
2017) (reducing fee award by fifty percent in FOIA case to account for limited success of 
plaintiff in securing release of only three out of sixty requested documents and 
eliminating specific excessive hours for a total reduction of approximately sixty percent). 
Plaintiff was provided an opportunity to justify a higher award by identifying specific 
hours but waived it through noncompliance with the court’s order. The reasonable 
number of hours is thus 54.475 hours, representing 52.3 hours for Attorney Sherman and 
2.175 hours for Attorney Joselson. 
     As the calculation set forth below shows, the presumptively reasonable fee is 
therefore $10,262.75. No “rare and exceptional circumstances” justify an adjustment to 
the presumptively reasonable fee in this case. Perdue, 559 U.S. at 552-53 (internal 
quotation marks and citations omitted). 

          Request | Request                Hours       Rate         Fee 

Sherman 

Joselson 

     Plaintiff also requests $3,352.50 in costs, consisting of $400.00 in filing fees, 
$44.50 in postage, and $2,908.00 in reimbursement for FOIA fees paid to the SSA. 
Defendant does not oppose Plaintiff's request for filing fees or postage, which are 
supported by Attorney Sherman’s affidavit and are recoverable as “other litigation costs” 
under 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(4)(E)(i). See Kuzma v. .R.S., 821 F.2d 930, 933 (2d Cir. 1987) 
(holding taxable costs under 28 U.S.C. § 1920 as well as “photocopying, postage, covers, 
exhibits, typing, transportation and parking fees” may be awarded under 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552(a)(4)(E)()). FOIA fees, however, are not a  litigation cost.

     Plaintiff is nonetheless entitled to a refund of his  FOIA fees because the court 
granted Plaintiffs cross motion for summary judgment for a refund. (Doc. 25 at 17.) 
While SSA “maintains that . .  . Plaintiff is not entitled to a fee waiver[,]” (Doc. 38 at 7), 
the court declines to revisit its decision on this point. 
     The court therefore GRANTS IN PART Plaintiffs motion for attorneys’ fees and 
costs (Doc. 37) and awards $10,262.75 in attorneys’ fees and $444.50 in costs. It 
DENIES the motion as to the remaining requested amounts. 
                               CONCLUSION 
     For the foregoing reasons, the court GRANTS IN PART and DENIES IN PART 
Plaintiff's motion for attorneys’ fees and costs (Doc. 37). Consistent with the court’s 
March 8, 2021 Opinion and Order, December 10, 2021 Opinion and Order, and this Entry 
Order, judgment shall be entered in part for SSA and in part for Plaintiff and Plaintiff 
shall be awarded the amount of $10,262.75 in attorneys’ fees, $444.50 in costs, and 
$2,908.00 as a refund for FOIA fees paid by Plaintiff to SSA. 
SO ORDERED. 
     Dated at Burlington, in the District of Vermont, this  30 day of March, 2022. 

                                   United States District Court

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT            PE 
                                    FOR THE                  ange aD  7  pe  □□     
                                                                   PIAS MU   □□□ 
                            DISTRICT OF VERMONT           feet 

 ROBERT E. SHAPIRO,                           )                     |   □□ 
             Plaintiff,                       )                         
                                              ) 
       v.                                     )      Case No. 2:19-cv-000238 
                                              ) 
 UNITED STATES SOCIAL SECURITY                ) 
 ADMINISTRATION,                              ) 
                                              ) 
             Defendant.                       ) 
    OPINION AND ORDER GRANTING   IN PART AND DENYING   IN PART 
  DEFENDANT’S MOTION TO DISMISS OR FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT AND 
     GRANTING   IN PART AND DENYING   IN PART PLAINTIFEF’S CROSS- 
                    MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT 
                                 (Docs. 14 & 16) 
      Plaintiff Robert E. Shapiro brings this suit pursuant to the Freedom of Information 
Act (“FOIA”) against the United States Social Security Administration (“Defendant”), 
arising from its alleged failure to adequately respond to his  FOIA request. Pending before 
the court are the parties’ cross-motions for summary judgment. 
I.     Procedural Background. 
      Plaintiff alleges three causes of action against Defendant: (1) failure to respond to 
his FOIA request within the statutory timeframe (Count I); (2) failure to produce 
responsive records (Count II); and (3) improper denial or failure to respond to his request 
for a fee waiver or reduction (Count III). Plaintiff seeks declaratory and injunctive relief 
in addition to compensatory damages and an award of attorney’s fees and costs. 
      On July 24, 2020, Defendant filed a motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim 
or, in the alternative, for summary judgment arguing that Plaintiff failed to exhaust his 
administrative remedies and thus dismissal of his claims is warranted. In the event 
Defendant does not prevail on this argument, it asserts that it is entitled to judgment as a 
matter of law in its favor because Plaintiff's  FOIA request was unreasonably broad and 

burdensome and its $2,908.00 fee was appropriate. 
      On September 22, 2020, Plaintiff cross-moved for summary judgment on the same 
issues and opposed Defendant’s motion. On November 3, 2020, the parties completed 
their briefing, at which point the court took the pending motions under advisement. 
      Plaintiff is represented by Emily J.  Joselson, Esq. and Justin G. Sherman, Esq. 
Assistant United States Attorney Jason M. Turner represents Defendant. 
I.    The Undisputed Facts. 
      Plaintiff is  a medical doctor and a professor of neurological sciences at the Larner 
College of Medicine at the University of Vermont. In addition to teaching and conducting 
research, he treats patients for migraine and other headache disorders as well as 
neurological disorders. He is  a member of the American Board of Psychiatry and 
Neurology specializing in neurology and is certified in the field of Headache Medicine by 
the United Council for Neurological Subspecialties. He is the founding president of the 
Alliance for Headache Disorders Advocacy, a national organization that advocates on 
behalf of the interests of persons with disabling headache disorders. He is the author of 
peer-reviewed articles and scholarly research on migraine disability, headache disorders, 
and other neurological disorders. 
     On October 5, 2018, Plaintiff filed an electronic  FOIA request, which states as 
follows: 
     I seek all documents, regardless of age, pertaining to [Social Security 
     Administration] assessment, evaluation, and decisions regarding inclusion 
     or exclusion of a proposed listing for impairments due to migraine and 
     other headache disorders in the [Social Security Administration] Listing of 
     Impairments (Blue Book). These documents should relate to, but not be 
     limited to, the 2013 to 2016 process of [Social Security Administration] 
     rules-making, ANPRM, NPRM and final rules-making/or revision of 
     Medical Criteria for Evaluating Neurological Disorders listings (11.00 
     Neurological — Adult). These documents should include, but [not] be [ ] 
     limited to, all relevant correspondence, emails, memoranda, drafts, cost- 
     benefit analyses, public comments, and related guidance documents, 
     including those documents from and between all relevant [Social Security 
     Administration] offices (i.e., Office of Regulations and Reports Clearance, 
     Office of Disability Policy, Office of General Counsel, Offices of the Chief

       Actuary and Budget, etc.), as well as those document from and between 
        [Social Security Administration] offices and offices of other Federal 
       Government agencies. I also seek all documents (i.e. from [Social Security 
       Administration] Office of Disability and Policy or other [Social Security 
       Administration] offices), regardless of age, pertaining to, and/or informing, 
       guidance as to how Listings of Impairments (e.g. 11. 02 Epilepsy) are to be 
       appropriately utilized and interpreted (i.e. by [Social Security 
       Administration] adjudicators and administrative law judges) in order to 
       assess and determine medical equivalency and impairments attributed to, or 
       caused by, migraine or other headache disorders, such as cluster headache. 
 (Doc. 15 at 1-2.) 
       Defendant received Plaintiff's FOIA request and assigned it tracking number SSA- 
 2019-000087. On May 29, 2019, Defendant issued Plaintiff a fee of $2,908.00 in 
 response to his FOIA request pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1306(c) and 20 C.F.R. § 402.175. 
 On or about June 5, 2019, Plaintiff agreed to pay the fee. 
       On July 26, 2019, Defendant issued an initial decision on Plaintiff's  FOIA request 
 and released two memoranda. It stated that it was withholding 1,377 responsive pages 
 under  FOIA Exemptions 5 and 6. Based on Plaintiff's review of the two memoranda, he 
determined they were irrelevant to his request as neither contained the terms “headache” 
or “migraine” and they did not pertain to the assessment of Social Security Disability 
Insurance (SSDI) or Social Security Insurance (SSI) claimants’ impairments for migraine 
or headache disorders under the Listing of Impairments.                       / 
      On or about August 23, 2019, Plaintiff appealed Defendant’s initial decision “due 
‘to withholding of responsive documents and the fee assessed by the agency.”! /d. at 3. In 
addition, Plaintiff appealed the withholding of other relevant documents that may not 

  With regard to the withholding of documents, Plaintiff's appeal states: 
      Specifically, I appeal the withholding by [Defendant] of 1,377 page(s) of response 
      documents cited in... [Defendant’s] response letter[.] 

      I hereby appeal the fee that [Defendant] assessed for fulfilling the  FOIA request 
      and I demand its refund. 
(Doc, 1-1 at 1.) 

have been included in Defendant’s response.” Plaintiff's appeal, set forth in a twenty- 
four-page letter, explains his grounds for appeal and the reasons why he believes there 
are additional non-exempt records responsive to his  FOIA request. Defendant received 
Plaintiff s appeal and assigned it tracking number SSA-2019-003518. 
      On December 20, 2019, Plaintiff filed  a Complaint with the United States District 
Court for the District of Vermont, although Defendant had not yet issued a decision on 
Plaintiffs appeal. Upon review of Plaintiff's administrative appeal, Defendant concluded 
that its initial interpretation of Plaintiff's FOIA request was too narrow and its initial 
search was not reasonably calculated to obtain all responsive records. Upon further 
review and searches, Defendant determined that Plaintiff's FOIA request was 
unreasonably broad and burdensome based on the lack of limitations on the time frame at 
issue, type of records sought, agency offices to be searched, and relevant subject matter. 
      C.T, Monica Chyn details the results of Defendant’s second search in her 
declaration (the “Chyn Declaration’’) attached to Defendant’s motion. She avers the 
second search for responsive documents involved Defendant conducting an electronically 
stored information search of 134 potential custodians of responsive documents, 
contacting “almost every ..  . Headquarters office[,]” and searching its e-discovery 
system. (Doc. 15 at 4.) Defendant used the search terms “headache,” “migraine,” and 
“neurological” or “neuro” and sampled documents from those searches. Based on the 
results, it concluded that the terms “headache” or “migraine” were likely to be responsive 
while documents using the terms “neurological” or “neuro” were not. 
     The second search identified 1,581,644 responsive pages that would require line- 
by-line review due to the nature of the documents requested and the likelihood that they 
would be subject to the deliberative process exemption. Defendant estimates that review 
would take 193,311 hours and cost $7,293,140.00. Defendant further claims that 

* Plaintiff described these additional records as follows: “I also appeal the withholding by 
[Defendant] of any further relevant documents responsive to the FOIA request which 
[Defendant] may not have included within the 1,377 page(s) of response documents cited in the 
response letter.” (Doc. 1-1 at 1.)

 processing Plaintiff's FOIA request would severely interfere with its ability to complete 
 its FOIA workload, including mandatory FOIA reports, meeting proactive disclosure 
 requirements, responding to congressional inquiries, satisfying information requests 
 under other statutes, and assisting members of the public with obtaining information 
 requests directly related to their Social Security benefits. 
 II.    The Disputed Facts. 
       Plaintiff filed a Statement of Disputed Facts in which he challenges the accuracy 
 of Defendant’s estimates of the burden imposed by his  FOIA request in light of the 
 irrelevance of the memoranda produced. On that same basis, Plaintiff challenges 
 Defendant’s conclusion that processing his  FOIA request would severely interfere with 
Defendant’s  FOIA workload.3 
 IV.    Conclusions of Law and Analysis. 
       A.     Standards of Review. 
       To survive a motion to dismiss, “a complaint must contain sufficient factual 
matter, accepted as true, to ‘state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.’” Ashcroft 
   Igbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678 (2009) (quoting Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 US. 544, 
570 (2007)). Plaintiff must allege sufficient facts to “nudge[ ] [his] claims across the line 
from conceivable to plausible[.]” Twombly, 550 U.S. at 570. “A claim has facial 
plausibility when the plaintiff pleads factual content that allows the court to draw the 
reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged.” /gbal, 556 
USS. at 678, 
      The sufficiency of a plaintiff's complaint under Rule 12(b)(6) is evaluated using a 
“two-pronged approach[.]” Hayden v. Paterson, 594 F.3d 150, 161 (2d Cir. 2010) 

3 Both these arguments as well as Plaintiffs arguments as to why public policy and other reasons 
favor the granting of his request do not create genuine issues of material fact. See Anderson v. 
Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248 (1986) (“Only disputes over facts that might affect the 
outcome of the suit under the governing law will properly preclude the entry of summary 
judgment.”); Timsina v.  United States, 2019 WL 3254689, at *2 (D. Vt. July 19, 2019), aff'd, 
835    App’x 633 (2d Cir. 2020) (“To the extent Plaintiffs’ responses to Defendant’s statement 
of undisputed material facts are more properly characterized as legal arguments, they will be 
disregarded because a legal argument cannot create a disputed fact under Fed. R. Civ. P. 56.”).

(internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting /qbal, 556 U.S. at 679). First, the court 
discounts legal conclusions and “[t]hreadbare recitals of the elements of a cause of action, 
supported by mere conclusory statements[.]” Jgbal, 556 U.S, at 678. Second, the court 
considers whether the factual allegations, taken as true, “plausibly give rise to an 
entitlement to relief.” Id. at 679. This second step is fact-bound and context-specific, 
requiring the court “to draw on its judicial experience and common sense.” /d. The court 
does not “weigh the evidence” or “evaluate the likelihood” that a plaintiff will prevail. 
Christiansen v. Omnicom Grp., Inc., 852 F.3d 195, 201 (2d Cir, 2017).           . 
      The court must grant summary judgment when “there is no genuine dispute as to 
any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” Fed. R. Civ. 
P. 56(a). “A fact is ‘material’ .. . if it ‘might affect the outcome of the-suit-under the 
governing law.’” Rodriguez v.  Vill.  Green Realty, Inc., 788 F.3d 31, 39 (2d Cir. 
2015) (quoting Anderson vy. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248 (1986)). “A dispute of 
fact is ‘genuine’ if ‘the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for 
the nonmoving party.’” /d. at 39-40 (quoting Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248). The court 
“constru[es] the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party” and 
“resolve[s] all ambiguities and draw{s] all permissible factual inferences in favor of the 
party against whom summary judgment is sought.” Lenzi v. Systemax, Inc., 944 F.3d 97, 
107 (2d Cir. 2019) (citations omitted). 
     The moving party always “bears the initial responsibility of informing the district 
court of the basis for its motion, and identifying those portions of the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the 
affidavits, if any, which it believes demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material 
fact.” Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323 (1986) (internal quotation marks 
omitted). When the moving party has carried its burden, its opponent must produce 
“sufficient evidence favoring the nonmoving party for a jury to return a verdict for that 
party.” Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249. If the evidence “presents a sufficient disagreement to 
require submission to a jury)” the court must deny summary judgment. /d. at 251-52. 
     “The function of the district court in considering the motion for summary

 judgment is not to resolve disputed questions of fact but only to determine whether, as to 
 any material issue, a genuine factual dispute exists.” Kaytor v. Elec. Boat Corp., 609 F.3d 
 537, 545 (2d Cir. 2010). “A non-moving party cannot avoid summary judgment simply 
 by asserting a ‘metaphysical doubt as to the material facts.’”” Woodman v.  WWOR-TY, 
 Inc., 411 F.3d 69, 75 (2d Cir. 2005) (quoting Matsushita Elec. Indus.  Co. v. Zenith Radio 
 Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586 (1986)). “If the evidence is merely colorable, or is not 
 significantly probative, summary judgment may be granted.” Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249- 
 50 (citations omitted). “Credibility determinations, the weighing of the evidence, and the 
 drawing of legitimate inferences from the facts are jury functions, not those ofa judge.” 
 Proctor v. LeClaire, 846 F.3d 597, 608 (2d Cir. 2017) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
       ‘Where, as here, there are cross-motions for summary judgment, ‘each party’s 
 motion must be examined on its own merits, and in each case all reasonable inferences 
 must be drawn against the party whose motion is under consideration.’” Lumbermens 
Mut. Cas.  Co. v. RGIS Inventory Specialists, LLC, 628 F.3d 46, 51 (2d Cir. 2010) 
(quoting Morales v. Quintel Entm’t, Inc., 249 F.3d 115, 121 (2d Cir. 2001)). 
      B.     Whether Plaintiff Exhausted His Administrative Remedies. 
      Defendant argues that Plaintiff's  FOIA request was not “perfected” and therefore 
he did not exhaust his administrative remedies because he did not reasonably describe the 
records sought. The “FOIA confers jurisdiction on the district courts ‘to enjoin the 
agency from withholding agency records and to order the production of any agency 
records improperly withheld.’” Bloomer v.  U.S. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., 870 F. Supp. 2d 
358, 364 (D. Vt. 2012) (quoting 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(4)(B)). It “requires that agency records 
be made available promptly upon a request that ‘reasonably describes such records and 
... is made in accordance with published rules stating the time, place, fees (if any), and 
procedures to be followed.’” Ruotolo v. Dep’t of Justice,  Tax Div., 53 F.3d 4, 9 (2d Cir. 
1995) (quoting 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(3)). In determining whether records have been 
“reasonably described” for the purposes of the FOIA, “[t]he linchpin inquiry is whether 
the agency is able to determine precisely what records (are) being requested.” Yeager v. 
Drug Enf’t Admin., 678 F.2d 315, 326 (D.C. Cir. 1982) (internal quotation marks

omitted). 
      “Exhaustion of administrative remedies is normally required as a precondition to 
suit under the  FOIA, unless waived by a party or the Court.” McKevitt v. Mueller, 689 F. 
Supp. 2d 661, 667 (S.D.N.Y. 2010). “An agency’s obligations commence upon receipt of 
a valid request; failure to file a perfected request therefore constitutes failure to exhaust 
administrative remedies.” Dale v. IRS, 238 F. Supp. 2d 99, 103 (D.D.C. 2002). 
      If an agency receives a request that falls short of the statutory or regulatory 
      requirements, then “it is not obligated to process the request,” and if a 
      “requester nonetheless files suit, [then he or] she is said to have failed to 
      exhaust [his or] her administrative remedies, and [he or] she must file a 
      perfected request before a court will compel the agency to respond.” 
Goldstein v. IRS, 279 F. Supp. 3d 170, 176 (D.D.C. 2017) (quoting Kalu v. IRS, 2015 WL 
4077756, at *4 (D.D.C. July 1, 2015)). 
      Here, Defendant opted to respond to Plaintiff's  FOIA request by producing two 
memoranda and withholding 1,377 pages of responsive documents under  FOIA 
Exemptions 5 and 6. Although Defendant may have been  under no obligation to process 
Plaintiff's  FOIA request, it chose to do so and made no initial claim that it was 
unreasonably broad or burdensome. In such circumstances, Defendant should not be 
heard to belatedly assert that Plaintiff's claim was not perfected. 
     Even if Plaintiff's FOIA request were not perfected, Defendant’s untimely 
response to it serves as a waiver of its exhaustion defense. FOIA requires that each 
agency “determine within [twenty] days ... after the receipt of any [FOIA] request 
whether to comply with such request and shall immediately notify the person making 
such request” and “make a determination with respect to any appeal within twenty days 
   after the receipt of such appeal.” 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(6)(A)(i)-(ii). “If the agency does 
not make a ‘determination’ within the relevant statutory time period, the requester may 
file suit without exhausting administrative appeal remedies.” Citizens for Resp. & Ethics 
in Wash, v. Fed. Election Comm’n, 711 F.3d 180, 185 (D.C. Cir. 2013); see New York v. 
Salazar, 701 F. Supp. 2d 224, 233 n.6 (N.D.N.Y. 2010) (observing that “[u]nder the 
statute,  ... a party is deemed to have constructively exhausted all administrative

 remedies if the agency fails to make a determination with respect to any appeal within 
 twenty days... after receipt of any such request”). In other words, 
       [i]f the agency does not adhere to FOIA’s explicit timelines, the “penalty” 
       is that the agency cannot rely on the administrative exhaustion requirement 
       to keep cases from getting into court. This scheme provides an incentive for 
       agencies to move quickly but recognizes that agencies may not always be 
       able to adhere to the timelines that trigger the exhaustion requirement. 
 Citizens for Resp. & Ethics in Wash., 711 F.3d at 189; see also MK. v.  U.S. Dep’t of 
 Justice, 1996 WL 509724, at *3 (S.D.N.Y. Sept. 9, 1996) (holding that “the 
 government’s failure to respond to [a plaintiff's] request within the statutory .. . time 
 limit does not give [a plaintiff] the right to obtain the requested documents; it merely 
 amounts to an exhaustion of administrative remedies and allows [a plaintiff] to bring [a] 
 lawsuit”). 
       For the foregoing reasons, Defendant’s motion to dismiss or, in the alternative, for 
 summary judgment because Plaintiff failed to exhaust his administrative remedies is 
DENIED. 
      C.     Whether Plaintiff’s FOIA Request was Unreasonably Broad and 
            Burdensome. 
      Plaintiff asserts that Defendant’s initial decision did not characterize Plaintiffs 
FOIA request as unreasonably broad and burdensome and that it “would set a dangerous 
precedent” (Doc.  16 at 12) if Defendant could conduct a narrow search and withhold 
documents and then, when challenged, claim a  FOIA request was too broad, Plaintiff 
further argues that producing 1,377 is not unreasonably burdensome and Defendant failed 
to show with reasonable specificity the withheld documents are subject to FOIA 
Exemptions 5 and 6.4 
      “An agency need not respond to a request that is so broad as to impose 

  “When an agency withholds requested information, it must demonstrate that the information is 
exempt from disclosure. .. . ‘with reasonable specificity[.]’” Jud.  Watch, Inc. v. Exp.-Imp. Bank, 
108 F. Supp. 2d 19, 25 (D.D.C. 2000) (quoting Hayden v. Nat'l Sec. Agency/Cent. Sec. Serv., 
608 F.2d 1381, 1387 (D.C. Cir. 1979)). The Chyn Declaration explains only that the documents 
were withheld “under  FOIA Exemptions 5 and 6.” (Doc. 14-1 at 5,   9.) The court has no means 
of evaluating whether the cited exemptions apply.

 an unreasonable burden upon the agency, such as one which require[s] the agency to 
locate, review, redact, and arrange for inspection a vast quantity of material.” Seife v. 
 U.S. Dep’t of State, 298 F. Supp. 3d 592, 611 (S.D.N.Y. 2018) (quoting Nat’l Day 
Laborer Org. Network v.  U.S. Immigr. & Customs Enf't, 2017 WL 1494513, at *11 
(S.D.N.Y. Apr. 19, 2017)) (internal quotation marks omitted) (alteration in original). 
“The rationale for this rule is that  FOIA was not intended to reduce government agencies 
to full-time investigators on behalf of requestors.” Freedom Watch, Inc. v. CIA, 895 F. 
Supp. 2d 221, 228 (D.D.C. 2012) (quoting Assassination Archives & Rsch. Ctr., Inc. v. 
CIA, 720 F. Supp. 217, 219 (D.D.C. 1989) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
“Nonetheless, if an agency claims that responding to a request is unreasonable, ‘it bears 
the burden to provide [a] sufficient explanation as to why such a search would be 
unreasonably burdensome.” Seife, 298 F. Supp. 3d at 612 (quoting Ayuda, Inc. v. Fed. 
Trade Comm'n, 70 F. Supp. 3d 247, 275 (D.D.C. 2014)) (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (alteration in original). “To make this determination, a court may rely on agency 
affidavits or declarations that show with reasonable specificity why documents withheld 
pursuant to a valid exemption cannot be further segregated.” Ayuda, Inc., 70 F. Supp. 3d 
at 275. “The [a]ffidavits submitted by an agency are accorded a presumption of good 
faith.” Wilner v. Nat’l Sec. Agency, 592 F.3d 60, 69 (2d Cir. 2009) (quoting Carney v. 
U.S. Dep’t of Justice, 19 F.3d 807, 812 (2d Cir. 1994) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(alteration in original). 
     “Courts often look for a detailed explanation by the agency regarding the time and 
expense of a proposed search in order to assess its reasonableness.” Wolfv. CIA, 569 F. 
Supp. 2d 1, 9 (D.D.C. 2008). “By contrast, “where an agency vaguely characterizes a 
search as costly and notes that such a search would take many hours to complete,’ courts 
have ‘rejected the agency’s claim as inadequate in explaining why the search would be 
unreasonably burdensome.’” Long v.  U.S. Immigr. & Customs Enf’t, 2020 WL 5994182, 
at *13 (N.D.N.Y. Oct. 9, 2020) (quoting Pinson v.  U.S. Dep’t of Justice, 80 F. Supp. 3d 
211, 217 (D.D.C. 2015)) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
    Among the factors that a court may consider in assessing the claimed 
                                     10 

       burden are the amount of time, expense, and personnel that would be  __ 
         required to complete document searches and production, as well as whether 
       the agency has the existing technology or would have to purchase new 
       technology to perform those tasks. 
 Long v. Immigr. & Customs Enf’t, 149 F. Supp. 3d 39, 55 (D.D.C. 2015). “Courts are 
 entitled to rely upon an agency affidavit for an explanation of why a further search would 
 be ‘unduly burdensome’ when  the affidavit is ‘relatively detailed, nonconclusory, and not 
 impugned by evidence in the record of bad faith on the part of the agency.” Wolf, 569 F. 
 Supp. 2d at 9 (quoting McGehee v.  CIA, 697 F.2d 1095,  1102 (D.C. Cir. 1983)). 
       In accordance with the Chyn Declaration, Defendant explains that it “determined 
 [its] initial interpretation of [Plaintiff's] FOIA request was too narrow and the search 
 performed was not reasonably calculated to obtain all records responsive to [Plaintiff s] 
 FOIA request.” (Doc.  14-1 at 5, § 12.) Ms. Chyn notes that the term “neurological” was 
 included in Defendant’s initial search because Plaintiff provided as an example of a 
record he was seeking “Medical Criteria for Evaluating Neurological Disorders.” Jd. at 
 10, {| 19. Upon discovering that the initial memoranda were not responsive, based on 
Plaintiff's appeal, Defendant limited its search to the terms “headache” or “migraine” and 
sampled the records to determine whether responsive records were likely to be obtained. 
Defendant likewise conducted a second search using the term “neurological” and, after 
sampling several records, determined that records were unlikely to be responsive and 
therefore did not include those documents in its 1,581,644-page estimate. 
      Plaintiff responds that the Chyn Declaration fails to account for the two-pronged 
nature of his request and had Defendant properly interpreted his FOIA request and made 
a separate search based on each prong, “[i]t could very well be that responding to one of 
these requests is not at all burdensome.’” (Doc.  16 at 13.) While this may be true, it does 
not negate the fact that Defendant located at least 1,581,644 responsive documents 

> Defendant asserts that Plaintiff submitted a single request with both prongs and never offered to 
narrow his request. In contrast, Plaintiff asserts that after filing suit he offered to narrow his 
request and Defendant terminated those negotiations. Neither party provides citations to the 
record to support these assertions. 
                                      1] 

pursuant to its second search. The test is whether the search was undertaken in good faith 
and reasonably responsive to the  FOIA request, not whether a better search method could 
be devised. See Robert v. CIA, 779 F. App’x 58, 59 (2d Cir. 2019) (holding that 
declarations “are accorded a presumption of good faith’ and ‘cannot be rebutted by 
purely speculative claims’ or bare assertions”) (quoting Grand Cent. P’ship, Inc. v. 
Cuomo, 166 F.3d 473, 489 (2d Cir. 1999)). 
      Plaintiff appealed on the basis that Defendant was charging a fee and withholding 
1,377 responsive documents pursuant to  FOIA Exemptions 5 and 6. He further stated, “I 
also appeal the withholding by [Defendant] of any further relevant documents responsive 
to the FOIA request which [Defendant] may not have included within the 1,377 page(s) 
of respons[iv]e documents cited in the response letter.” (Doc.  1-1 at 1.) This latter aspect 
of Plaintiff's appeal provided justification for Defendant’s second search. Plaintiff thus 
fails to establish that Defendant’s second search was undertaken in bad faith. 
     Plaintiff's  FOIA request sought “all documents, regardless of age, pertaining to 
[Social Security Administration] assessment, evaluation, and decisions regarding 
inclusion or exclusion of a proposed listing for impairments due to migraine and other 
headache disorders in the [Social Security Administration] Listing of Impairments (Blue 
Book).” (Doc. 15 at 1.) Although Plaintiff provided examples of the documents 
requested, he did not limit his request to those documents, but instead stated he sought 
“all relevant correspondence, emails, memoranda, drafts, cost-benefit analyses, public 
comments, and related guidance documents, including those documents from and 
between all relevant [Social Security Administration] offices . .. as well as those 
document[s] from and between [Social Security Administration] offices and offices of 
other  Federal Government agencies.” /d. at 1-2. Plaintiff further sought: 
     all documents... , regardless of age, pertaining to, and/or informing, 
     guidance as to how Listings of Impairments (e.g. 11. 02 Epilepsy) are to be 
     appropriately utilized and interpreted . .:. by [Social Security 
     Administration] adjudicators and administrative law judges[ ] in order to 
     assess and determine medical equivalency and [headache and migraine] 
     impairments[.] 

                                     12 

Td. at 2. On its face, Plaintiff's FOTA request had no time limits, no document type 
limitations, no custodian limitations, no geographic locations, and encompassed 
numerous subject matters. It extends not only to the documents within Defendant’s 
offices but also between Defendant and all “offices of other Federal Government 
agencies.” /d. It was therefore clearly unreasonably broad in the breadth of records it 
sought. 
      Defendant contends that reviewing the identified 1,581,644 pages alone would 
take at least 193,311 hours of full-time work and would cost approximately 
$7,293,140.00 because, based on the type of records sought, it would require a line-by- 
line manual review of documents likely to contain deliberative process exemptions. The 
Chyn Declaration is detailed and nonconclusory as to how these estimates were reached. 
The court concludes that it was submitted in good faith. 
      For the foregoing reasons, Defendant has sustained its burden of demonstrating 
that Plaintiff's FOIA request was unreasonably broad and burdensome based not only on 
the Chyn Declaration, but due to the breadth of the records sought.® Defendant’s motion 
for summary judgment on this issue is thus GRANTED and Plaintiff's cross-motion for 
summary judgment is DENIED. Defendant must specify a basis for withholding the 
initial 1,377 responsive documents identified under Exemptions 5 and 6 within thirty (30) 
days of this Opinion and Order. 

6 See, e.g., Vietnam Veterans of Am. Conn. Greater Hartford Chapter 120 v. Dep’t of Homeland 
Sec., 8 F. Supp. 3d 188, 204 (D. Conn. 2014) (concluding that based on the plaintiffs’ “request 
for all of the individual service members’ separation packets[,|” which included at least 26,000 
records, “that the plaintiffs’ original request would have imposed an unreasonable burden on the 
defendants[.]””); Nation Mag., Wash. Bureau v.  U.S. Customs Serv., 71 F.3d 885, 892 (D.C. Cir. 
1995) (finding that a “search through 23 years of unindexed files for records pertaining to [a 
single person]... would impose an unreasonable burden on the agency”); Ayuda, Inc. v. Fed. 
Trade Comm’n, 70 F. Supp. 3d 247, 276 (D.D.C. 2014) (holding that “performing a manual 
review of the Consumer Sentinel database complaints for exempt personal identifying 
information[,]” which defendant estimated would take about 8,000 hours, “would impose an 
unreasonable burden on the [defendant] well beyond what FOIA requires from an agency”); 
     Day Laborer Org. Network v.  U.S. Immigr. & Cust. Enft, 2017 WL 1494513, at *12 
(S.D.N.Y. Apr. 19, 2017) (ruling that a review which “would take between 1,000 and 3,000 work 
weeks to complete, or between 19 and 58 work years, .  .. would be unreasonably burdensome.”). 
                                     13 

       D.     Whether Defendant Violated Plaintiff’s Right to  a Fee Waiver or 
             Reduction Under FOIA. 
       Defendant asserts that it was entitled to assess fees for its response to Plaintiffs 
 FOIA request under the Social Security Act (“SSA”) and agency regulations because:. 
       whenever the Commissioner of Social Security or the Secretary determines 
       that a request for information is made... for any other purpose not directly 
       related to the administration of the program or programs under this chapter 
       to which such information relates, such Commissioner or Secretary may 
       require the requester to pay the full cost, as determined by such 
       Commissioner or Secretary, of providing such information. 
 42 U.S.C. § 1306(c). The “major criteria” the Social Security Administration considers in 
 deciding whether a proposed use is “directly related” to a “program purpose” are: 

              (A) Is the information needed to pursue some benefit under the Act? 
             (B) Is the information needed solely to verify the accuracy of 
             information obtained in connection with a program administered 
            under the Act? 
            (C) Is the information needed in connection with an activity which 
            has been authorized under the Act? 
            (D) Is the information needed by an employer to carry out her or his 
            taxpaying responsibilities under the Federal Insurance Contributions 
            Act or section 218 of the Act? 
      (ii) We will consider on a case by case basis those requests which do not 
      meet these criteria but are claimed to be program related. 
20 C.F.R. § 402.170(a)(2)@)-(ii). 
      Defendant contends that Plaintiff's  FOIA request is not program-related and failed 
to comply with the requirements for requesting a fee waiver because a requester “must 
make [a] request for a waiver or reduction at the same time [he or she] make[s] [his or 
her] request for records. [He or she] should explain why [he or she] believe[s] a waiver or 
reduction is proper under the analysis in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section.” 20 
C.F.R. § 402.185(e). Without denying that he failed to timely request a fee waiver, 
Plaintiff argues that he is entitled to one because he is not seeking records for a 
commercial purpose or, in the alternative, under § 1106(c) of the SSA, his request is 
program-related because disclosure will help educate the public and inform disability 

                                      14 

 claimants how to assert claims based on headache and migraine disorders. 
       Under FOIA, “fees shall be limited to reasonable standard charges for document 
 duplication when records are not sought for commercial use and the request is made by 
 an educational or noncommercial scientific institution, whose purpose is scholarly or 
 scientific research[.]” 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(4)(A)GDCD. Duplication fees may be waived or 
 reduced “if disclosure of the information is in the public interest because it is likely to 
 contribute significantly to public understanding of the operations or activities of the 
 government and is not primarily in the commercial interest of the requester.” 5 U.S.C. 
 § 552(a)(4)(A) (ii). 
       In support of his assertion that his  FOIA request was non-commercial and was in 
 the public interest, Plaintiff contends that the information sought was for a scholarly 
 purpose and would increase the public’s understanding of Defendant’s processes and 
 policies for determining headache and migraine-related disabilities, which affect 
 approximately fifty million people in the United States. While this may be true, it does 
not end the inquiry because 20 C.F.R. § 402.185(e) states: “You must make your request 
for a waiver or reduction at the same time you make your request for records.” Plaintiff 
did not request a waiver or reduction of fee until he appealed Defendant’s initial response 
to his  FOIA request.                 
      Plaintiff argues that his untimely fee request or appeal should be excused because 
the Open Government Act of 2007 (the “2007 Amendment”) prohibits an agency from 
charging a fee if an agency fails to comply with  FOIA’s deadlines. He asserts the 2007 
Amendment was intended to strengthen FOIA and repealed the SSA’s “major criteria” 
framework for analyzing a fee waiver as evident by the SSA’s provision that “an agency 
shall not assess any search fees .. . under this subparagraph if the agency has failed to 
comply with any time limit under paragraph (6)[,]” 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(4)(A)(viii), which 
refers to an agency’s requirement to respond to any FOIA request within twenty days of 
its receipt. 
      Under 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(4)(A)(vi) none of the limitations to the FOIA fee 
provisions apply when Congress has enacted a separate statute setting fees for particular 
                                      15 

types of records: “[n]othing in this subparagraph shall supersede fees chargeable under a 
statute specifically providing for setting the level of fees for particular types of records.” 
As the Supreme Court has observed: 
      When confronted with two Acts of Congress allegedly touching on the 
      same topic, this Court is not at liberty to pick and choose among 
      congressional enactments and must instead strive to give effect to both. A 
      party seeking to suggest that two statutes cannot be harmonized, and that 
      one displaces the other, bears the heavy burden of showing a  clearly 
      expressed congressional intention that such a result should follow. The 
      intention must be clear and manifest. And in approaching a claimed 
      conflict, we come armed with the stron[g] presum[ption] that repeals by 
      implication are disfavored and that Congress will specifically address 
      preexisting law when it wishes to suspend its normal operations in a  later 
      statute. 
Epic Sys.  Corp. v. Lewis, 138 8. Ct. 1612, 1624 (2018) (internal citations and quotation 
marks omitted) (alterations in original). 
      In this case, the two statutes can be harmonized by interpreting the 2007 
Amendment as prohibiting the charging of fees when an agency fails to timely respond to 
a FOIA request. “To underscore Congress’s belief in the importance of the statutory time 
limit, the 2007 Amendments declare that ‘[a]n agency shall not assess search fees... if 
the agency fails to comply with any time limit? of FOIA.” Bensman v., Nat’l Park Serv., 
806 F. Supp. 2d 31, 38 (D.D.C. 2011) (quoting 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(4)(A)(viii)) (emphasis 
and alterations in original).’ Defendant’s interpretation would render the 2007 

7 Congressional intent further evinces the desire for the 2007 Amendment to strengthen 
FOIA’s time requirements: 
     Congress passed the [OGA] (“2007 Amendment{ |”) to amend certain sections of 
     FOIA, including the provisions on which Plaintiff relies here. See Pub. L. 110- 
     175, 121 Stat. 2524 (2007) (codified at 5 U.S.C. §§ 552(a)(4)(A) 
     and 552(a)(6)(A)). The legislative history of the 2007 Amendment[ ] evinces a 
     strong desire by Congress to curb agencies’ delays in processing  FOIA 
     requests. See S. Rep. No. 110-59, 110th Cong., 1st Sess. (Apr. 30, 2007). The 
     Senate report explains that the 2007 Amendment| ] “address[ | the growing 
     backlog of  FOIA requests and restore[ ] meaningful deadlines for agency action, 
     by ensuring that the 20-day statutory clock runs immediately upon an agency’s 
     receipt of a request and by imposing consequences on federal agencies for missing 
     the deadline.” Jd. at  3 (emphasis added). Indeed, “the major delays encountered 
                                     16 

  Amendment superfluous because it would allow an agency to charge fees regardless of 
  whether it complied with FOIA deadlines, provided it could cite a separate statute setting 
  fees. Defendant is therefore prevented from assessing a fee when it fails to comply with 
  FOIA time requirements unless there is an exception under 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(4)(viii) □□□ 
  Any other interpretation would render the 2007 Amendment a nullity and frustrate its 
  legislative purpose. See Cnty. of Nassau v. Leavitt, 524 F.3d 408, 416 (2d Cir. 2008) 
  (holding “w]e are obliged[, however,] to give effect, if possible, to every clause and 
  word of a statute, and to render none superfluous”) (second alteration in original) 
  (internal quotation marks omitted). 
        Because no exception excuses Defendant’s non-compliance with FOIA deadlines, 
  Plaintiff's cross-motion for summary judgment for a refund of his fee is GRANTED and 
  Defendant’s motion for summary judgment on that same issue is DENIED. 
        E.     Whether Plaintiff is Entitled to Costs. 
       Defendant contends that Plaintiff is not entitled to attorney’s fees and costs 
 because he has not substantially prevailed in this matter. The  FOIA provides that “[t]he 
 court may assess against the United States reasonable attorney fees and other litigation 
 costs reasonably incurred in any case under this section in which the complainant has 
 substantially prevailed.” 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(4)(E)(i). “To be entitled to such an award, a 
_   litigant must first establish eligibility by showing that he [or she] ‘substantially prevailed’ 
 in his [or her] lawsuit.” Pietrangelo v.  U.S. Army, 568 F.3d 341, 343 (2d Cir. 2009). Ifa 
 plaintiff substantially prevailed, he or she must establish: 
       entitle[ment] to an award under the four criteria the court weighs in 
       determining whether fees are appropriate: (1) the public benefit derived 
       from the case; (2) the commercial benefit to the plaintiff; (3) the nature of 
       the plaintiff's interest in the records; and (4) whether the Government had a 

       by FOIA requestors” were “[c]hief among the problems with FOIA” that 
       Congress sought to remedy by passing the 2007 Amendment{ ]. /d. (noting also 
       that “the oldest outstanding FOIA requests date back to 1989-before the collapse 
       of the Soviet Union”’). 
 Bensman v. Nat'l Park Sery., 806 F. Supp. 2d 31, 37-38 (D.D.C. 2011). 

                                       17 

      reasonable basis for withholding requested information. 
Id. 
      In this case, although Plaintiff's FOIA request was unreasonably broad and 
burdensome, Defendant provided Plaintiff with no opportunity to narrow it but instead 
waited until Plaintiff filed an appeal to conduct a more thorough search. In doing so, 
Defendant failed to comply with FOIA’s deadlines. Had Defendant acted in a timely 
manner and rejected Plaintiff’s initial request, Plaintiff could have narrowed it and 
obtained responsive documents for his scholarly endeavors. Defendant offered Plaintiff 
no explanation as to why the withheld documents were supported by FOIA exemptions 
and offers no explanation to this court. Until it does so, the court cannot evaluate whether 
its first response to Plaintiffs FOIA request wrongfully withheld responsive documents. 
As Defendant concedes its first search was too narrow, it not only substantially 
contributed to the delay in this case, but impeded Plaintiff's request for documents in 
furtherance of the public interest. 
     Plaintiff has no apparent commercial interest in the information, and the Agency’s 
piecemeal response to his request frustrated the legislative purpose of  FOIA. Defendant 
has, however, prevailed in its argument that Plaintiff's FOIA request was unreasonably 
broad and burdensome. Because this case presents a close call as to which party is the 
prevailing party, the court awaits Defendant’s submission of information in support of the 
withheld documents under FOIA Exemptions 5 and 6. 
                               CONCLUSION 
     For the foregoing reasons, the court GRANTS IN PART and DENIES IN PART 
Defendant’s motion to dismiss or, in the alternative, for summary judgment and 
GRANTS IN PART and DENIES IN PART Plaintiff's cross-motion for summary 
judgment. The court ORDERS Defendant to specify a basis for withholding the initial 
1,377 responsive documents identified under Exemptions 5 and 6 within thirty (30) days 
of this Opinion and Order. 

                                     18 

SO ORDERED.
    Dated at Burlington, in the District of Vermont, this  a  day of March, 2021. 

                                  Christina Reiss, District J udge 
                                  United States District Court 

                                   19