UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
                  SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                            
SONTERRA CAPITAL MASTER FUND, LTD.,                                         
RICHARD DENNIS, and FRONTPOINT                                              
EUROPEAN FUND, L.P., on behalf of themselves                                
and all others similarly situated,                                          
                                          Docket No. 15-cv-3538 (VSB)      
                   Plaintiffs,                                             
              -against-                                                    
BARCLAYS BANK PLC, COOPERATIEVE                                             
CENTRALE RAIFFEISEN-BOERENLEENBANK                                          
B.A., DEUTSCHE BANK AG, LLOYDS BANKING                                      
GROUP PLC, THE ROYAL BANK OF SCOTLAND                                       
PLC, UBS AG, JOHN DOE NOS. 1-50, and                                        
BARCLAYS CAPITAL, INC.,                                                     
                   Defendants.                                             
                STIPULATION AND PROTECTIVE ORDER                           
                GOVERNING MATERIALS PRODUCED BY                            
                        DEUTSCHE BANK AG                                   
    VERNON S. BRODERICK, District Judge:                                 
    Defendant Deutsche Bank AG (“Deutsche Bank”) and Plaintiffs Richard Dennis and Fund 
Liquidation Holdings LLC, and any subsequently named plaintiff(s) (collectively, “Representative 
Plaintiffs”) in this action have agreed to the following terms of confidentiality, and the Court 
having found that good cause exists for issuance of an appropriately tailored confidentiality order 

governing the exchange of information between Deutsche Bank and Representative Plaintiffs, it is 
therefore hereby ORDERED that any person subject to this order (the “Order”)—including, 
without limitation, the parties to this action, their representatives, agents, experts and consultants, 
all non-parties providing discovery in this action, and all other interested persons with actual or 
constructive notice of the Order—shall adhere to the following terms:     
    1.   All information, documents, and data of any kind provided by Deutsche Bank, or 
any current or former affiliate, subsidiary, or employee of Deutsche Bank, with respect to this 
action, including, without limitation, written discovery responses and deposition testimony, shall 
hereinafter be referred to as “Deutsche Bank Discovery Material.” Any person subject to this Order 

who receives from any other person any Deutsche Bank Discovery Material, including any party 
to this action, shall not disclose said Deutsche Bank Discovery Material to anyone else except as 
expressly permitted hereunder.                                            
    2.   All Deutsche Bank Discovery Material shall be used solely for the prosecution or 
the defense of this action (including any appeal therefrom) and for no other purpose, including use 
in other legal actions, present or future, provided that any designated claims administrator of the 
proposed  settlement  between  Deutsche  Bank  and  Representative  Plaintiffs  (the  “Settlement 
Administrator”) may use the contact information of counterparties to Sterling LIBOR-Based 
Derivatives transactions for the purpose of mailing the notice of the proposed settlement to any 
member of the settlement class conditionally certified by the Court in connection with preliminary 
approval of the settlement, and other data customarily used by a Settlement Administrator in 
processing claims. The Deutsche Bank Discovery Material shall not be used for institution or 
prosecution of any other action or proceedings against any Released Party.1 The foregoing 
restriction shall not apply to any information or documents that is or becomes publicly available. 

    3.   Deutsche Bank may designate as “Confidential” any Deutsche Bank Discovery 
Material  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  “Confidential  Deutsche  Bank  Discovery  Material”)  that 
consists of:                                                              
         a. Financial information not previously disclosed to the public (including without
           limitation, profit and loss reports or estimates, trading positions, transactional
           data, liquidity reports, materials related to fees received for services provided,
           and materials related to employee compensation);              
         b. Material not previously disclosed to the public relating to ownership or control
           of any non-public company;                                    

         c. Business  plans,  trading  strategies,  or  marketing  materials  not  previously
           disclosed to the public;                                      
         d. Proprietary business information or  communications,  or  other  confidential
           research, development, or commercial information or communications;


1 “Released Party” refers to Deutsche Bank, its predecessors, successors and assigns, its direct and indirect parents, 
subsidiaries and affiliates, and each of their respective current and former officers, directors, employees, managers, 
members, partners, agents (in their capacity as agents of Deutsche Bank), shareholders (in their capacity as 
shareholders of Deutsche Bank), attorneys, insurers, or legal representatives, and the predecessors, successors, heirs, 
executors, administrators, and assigns of each of the foregoing. As used in this provision, “affiliates” means entities 
controlling, controlled by, or under common control with a Released Party. For the avoidance of doubt, “Released 
Parties” shall not include any named Defendants other than Deutsche Bank.  
         e. Information  for  which  applicable  law—foreign  or  domestic—requires
           confidential treatment, to the extent disclosure is permitted by such law, or
         f. Any other category of information hereinafter given confidential status by the
           Court.                                                        
    4.   Deutsche Bank may designate any given Deutsche Bank Discovery Material as

“Highly Confidential” (hereinafter referred to as “Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery 
Material”) where: (a) Deutsche Bank reasonably and in good faith believes that disclosure of the 
Deutsche Bank Discovery Material to the full extent otherwise permitted by this Order could result 
in  competitive,  commercial  or  personal  harm  to  Deutsche  Bank,  or  to  improper  market 
manipulation; or (b) such Deutsche Bank Discovery Material includes information for which 
applicable law—foreign or domestic—requires confidential treatment, to the extent disclosure is 
permitted by such law, trade secrets within the meaning of Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 
26(c)(1)(G), and/or undisclosed financial information of a third party.   
    5.   With respect to Confidential or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery

Material other than deposition transcripts and exhibits, Deutsche Bank and its counsel may 
designate such Deutsche Bank Discovery Material as “Confidential” or “Highly Confidential” by 
stamping or otherwise clearly marking “Confidential” or “Highly Confidential” on the Deutsche 
Bank Discovery Material in a manner that will not interfere with legibility or audibility. Deposition 
testimony and exhibits may be designated as Confidential or Highly Confidential either on the 
record during the deposition or within thirty (30) days of receipt of the transcript. Until such time 
period expires without designation having been made, the entire deposition transcript and exhibits 
shall be treated as Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material unless otherwise 
specified in writing or on the record of the deposition by Deutsche Bank. If Deutsche Bank 
designates the entire deposition transcript and/or exhibits, or any portion thereof, as Confidential 
or Highly Confidential, the designated portions of the transcript and/or exhibits shall be bound in 
a separate volume and marked “Confidential Information Governed by Protective Order” or 
“Highly Confidential Information Governed by Protective Order” by the reporter. 
    6.   Any court reporter or videographer who transcribes or videotapes testimony at a 

deposition in this action containing Confidential or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery 
Material shall (a) certify that he or she has read this Order and manifests his or her assent to be 
bound thereby by signing Exhibit A, (b) treat copies of any transcript, reporter’s notes, audio or 
video recordings, or any other transcription  records as Confidential or Highly Confidential 
Deutsche Bank Discovery Material, and (c) deliver any transcript or video containing Confidential 
or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material only to counsel, the witness or the Court 
(filed under seal). A party who notices a deposition shall be responsible for notifying any court 
reporter or videographer of the existence of this Order and obtaining such consent to be bound. 
    7.   During a deposition, only persons to whom, respectively, disclosure of Confidential 

or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material is permitted under Paragraphs 10 or 11 
of this Order shall remain present while Confidential or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank 
Discovery Material is being used or discussed. If, during the course of a deposition, the response 
to a question would require the witness to disclose Confidential or Highly Confidential Deutsche 
Bank Discovery Material, the witness may assert the confidentiality of the material as a basis for 
refusing to answer only if a person not authorized under, respectively, Paragraphs 10 or 11 of this 
Order is present.                                                         
    8.   If at any time prior to the trial of this action, a party—other than Deutsche Bank
who produced and originally designated such material—believes that some portion[s] of Deutsche 
Bank Discovery Material were previously produced without a proper designation (including that 
the  Deutsche  Bank  Discovery  Material  should  have  been  produced  with  a  less  restrictive 
designation), that party may notify all parties and Deutsche Bank in writing, and such designated 
portion[s] of the Deutsche Bank Discovery Material will thereafter be treated as Confidential or 
Highly Confidential under the terms of this Order until any dispute about the proper designation 

is resolved. In addition, Deutsche Bank and the party seeking a new designation will consult and 
attempt to agree upon the proper designation. If they are unable to resolve any dispute about the 
proper designation of such Deutsche Bank Discovery Material, counsel for all affected persons 
will convene a joint telephone call with the Court to obtain a ruling. Pursuant to such ruling, 
Deutsche Bank shall provide to each other party replacement versions of such Deutsche Bank 
Discovery Material that bears the new designation within five (5) business days of agreement upon 
such designation or resolution by the Court of any dispute or, in the case of voluminous material 
or other exceptional circumstances, as soon as is practicable.            
    9.   If at any time prior to the trial of this action, Deutsche Bank realizes that some 

portion[s] of the Deutsche Bank Discovery Material it previously produced was not properly 
designated (including being subject to a less restrictive designation), it may so designate by 
notifying all parties who received such material in writing, and such designated portion[s] of the 
Deutsche  Bank  Discovery  Material  will  thereafter  be  treated  pursuant  to  the  replacement 
designation. In addition, Deutsche Bank shall provide all parties with replacement versions of such 
Deutsche Bank Discovery Material that bear the replacement designation within five (5) business 
days of providing such notice, or, in the case of voluminous material or other exceptional 
circumstances, as soon as is practicable.                                 
    10.  Other than Deutsche Bank, no person subject to this Order (including any witness 
to  whom  Confidential  Deutsche  Bank  Discovery  Material  has  been  provided  pursuant  to 
subparagraph  (d)  below)  shall  disclose,  summarize,  describe,  characterize  or  otherwise 
communicate or make available any of the Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material to any 
other person whomsoever, except to individuals described in the below subparagraphs. Any 

disclosure permitted by this paragraph may be made only to the following persons and only to the 
extent reasonably necessary to prosecute and defend this action:          
         a. Representative Plaintiffs, or any other party to this action that first executes a
           Non-Disclosure Agreement in the form annexed as Exhibit A hereto (“NDA
           Parties”);                                                    
         b. Representative  Plaintiffs’  or  NDA  Parties’  outside  counsel  and  in-house
           counsel participating in the prosecution and defense of this matter in their roles
           as lawyers, including any paralegal, translator, administrative assistant and/or
           other assistant employed by such counsel and involved in this matter;

         c. as to any document, its author, its addressee, and any other person indicated on
           the face of the document as having received a copy;           
         d. any witness who counsel for Representative Plaintiffs or an NDA Party in good
           faith believes may be called to testify at trial, hearing or deposition in this action
           or is called to testify at trial, hearing or deposition in this action, provided such
           person has, prior to disclosure, been advised of the contents of this Order;
         e. any person retained by Representative Plaintiffs or an NDA Party to serve as an
           expert witness or otherwise provide specialized advice to counsel in connection
           with this action, provided such person has first executed a Non-Disclosure 
           Agreement in the form annexed as an Exhibit A hereto;         
         f. stenographers engaged to transcribe depositions conducted in this action;
         g. independent photocopying, graphic production services, or litigation support
           services  employed  by  Representative Plaintiffs or an NDA Party or their

           counsel to assist in this action and computer service personnel performing
           duties in relation to a computerized litigation system;       
         h. the Court and its support personnel;                         
         i. any court-appointed Settlement Administrator, including staff, independent
           photocopying  services,  graphic  production  services,  or  support  services
           employed by the Settlement Administrator, provided such person has first
           executed the Non-Disclosure Agreement that is attached hereto as Exhibit A
           prior to the disclosure, with such data being limited to contact information for
           counterparties to Sterling LIBOR-Based Derivatives transactions with whom

           Deutsche Bank transacted during the class period and other data customarily
           used by a Settlement Administrator in processing claims; and  
         j. any other person whom Deutsche Bank in its sole discretion agrees in writing
           may have access to such Deutsche Bank Discovery Material.     
    11.  Other than Deutsche Bank, no person subject to this Order (including any witness
to whom Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material has been provided pursuant to 
subparagraph  (d)  below)  shall  disclose,  summarize,  describe,  characterize  or  otherwise 
communicate or make available any of the Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material 
to any other person whomsoever, except to individuals described in the below subparagraphs. Any 
disclosure permitted by this paragraph may be made only to the following persons and only to the 
extent reasonably necessary to prosecute and defend this action:          
      a. Representative Plaintiffs or NDA Parties’ outside counsel and in-house counsel
         participating in the prosecution and defense of this matter in their roles as lawyers,
         including any paralegal, translator, administrative assistant and/or other assistant

         employed by such counsel and involved in this matter;           
      b. in the case of any Representative Plaintiffs or NDA Party to the litigation who is a
         natural person, to that natural person himself; or in the case of any Representative
         Plaintiffs or NDA Party to the litigation that is not a natural person, those specific
         designated representatives of the Representative Plaintiffs or NDA Party who are
         the primary decision-makers with authority and control over the prosecution or
         defense of the litigation;                                      
      c. as to any document, its author, its addressee, and any other person indicated on the
         face of the document as having received a copy;                 

      d. any witness who has been subpoenaed or otherwise called to testify at trial, hearing
         or deposition in this action, provided such person has, prior to disclosure, been
         advised of the contents of this Order;                          
      e. any person retained by Representative Plaintiffs or an NDA Party to serve as an
         expert witness or otherwise provide specialized advice to counsel in connection
         with  this  action,  provided  such  person  has  first  executed  a  Non-Disclosure
         Agreement in the form annexed as an Exhibit A hereto;           
      f. stenographers engaged to transcribe depositions conducted in this action;
      g. independent  photocopying,  graphic  production  services,  or  litigation  support
         services employed by Representative Plaintiffs or an NDA Party or their counsel to
         assist in this action and computer service personnel performing duties in relation to
         a computerized litigation system;                               
      h. the Court and its support personnel;                            

      i. any  court-appointed  Settlement  Administrator,  including  staff,  independent
         photocopying services, graphic production services, or support services employed
         by the Settlement Administrator, provided such person has first executed the Non-
         Disclosure Agreement that is attached hereto as Exhibit A prior to the disclosure,
         with such data being limited to contact information for counterparties to Sterling
         LIBOR-Based  Derivatives  transactions  with  whom  Deutsche  Bank  transacted
         during  the  class  period  and  other  data  customarily  used  by  a  Settlement
         Administrator in processing claims; and                         
      j. any other person whom Deutsche Bank in its sole discretion agrees in writing may

         have access to such Deutsche Bank Discovery Material.           
    12.  Nothing in this Order will bar or otherwise restrict an attorney from rendering
advice to his or her client with respect to this action or from relying upon or generally referring to 
Confidential or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material in rendering such advice; 
provided, however, that in rendering such advice or in otherwise communicating with his or her 
client, the attorney shall not reveal or disclose the specific content of Deutsche Bank Discovery 
Material if such disclosure is not otherwise permitted under this Order.  
13.  Regarding Deutsche Bank Discovery Material related to experts:  
 a. The  provisions  of  Federal  Rule  of  Civil  Procedure  26(b)(3)(A)-(C)  and
    26(b)(4)(A)-(D), effective December 1, 2015, shall apply to the protection of draft
    expert reports and communications between a party’s attorney(s) and the party’s
    expert(s) to the extent that they are not inconsistent with the terms of this Order.

 b. Testifying experts shall not be subject to discovery with respect to any draft of his
    or her report(s) in this case. Draft reports, notes, or outlines for draft reports
    developed and drafted by the testifying expert and/or his or her staff are also exempt
    from discovery.                                                 
 c. Discovery of materials provided to testifying experts shall be limited to those
    materials, facts, consulting expert opinions, and other matters actually relied upon
    by the testifying expert in forming his or her final report(s), trial and/or deposition
    testimony or any opinion presented in this case. No discovery can be taken from
    any non-testifying or consulting expert.                        

 d. No conversations or communications between parties and/or counsel and any
    testifying  expert  will  be  subject  to  discovery  unless  the  conversations  or
    communications identify facts or data provided by counsel and are actually relied
    upon by such expert in forming his or her final report(s), trial and/or deposition
    testimony or any opinion presented in this case.                
 e. Materials, communications, and other information exempt from discovery under
    the foregoing Paragraphs 13(a)-(d) shall be treated as attorney work product for the
    purposes of these proceedings and this Order.                   
    14.  Nothing in this Order shall limit Deutsche Bank’s rights concerning the Deutsche
Bank Discovery Material it produces.                                      
    15.  Prior to any disclosure of any Confidential or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank
Discovery Material to any person referred to in subparagraphs 10(d) or 11(d) above, such person 
shall be provided by counsel with a copy of this Order and shall, prior to disclosure, be advised of 

the contents of this Order. Prior to any disclosure of any Confidential or Highly Confidential 
Deutsche Bank Discovery Material to any person referred to in subparagraphs 10(e) or 11(e) 
above, such person shall be provided by counsel with a copy of this Order and shall sign a Non-
Disclosure Agreement in the form annexed as Exhibit A hereto stating that that person has read 
this Order and agrees to be bound by its terms. Said counsel shall retain each signed Non-
Disclosure Agreement, and produce it to opposing counsel prior to such person being permitted to 
testify (at deposition, hearing or trial).                                
    16.  All Confidential and Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material filed
with the Court, and all portions of pleadings, motions or other papers filed with the Court that 

disclose such Confidential or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material, shall be 
filed under seal with the Clerk of the Court and kept under seal until further order of the Court. 
The parties will use their reasonable best efforts to minimize such sealing. Any party to this action 
may access Confidential or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material filed under 
seal with the Court, and shall be subject to this Order with respect to any Confidential or Highly 
Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material filed under seal, including but not limited to the 
confidentiality restrictions set forth in paragraphs 10 and 11.           
         a.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Order and except as
otherwise permitted by this Court’s Individual Rules & Practices in Civil Cases (“Individual 
Rules”), no document may be redacted or filed with the Clerk under seal without a further Order 
of this Court addressing the specific documents or portions of documents to be sealed. Any 
application to redact a document or file under seal shall comply with the requirements of the 
Court’s Individual Rules and, to be approved, any redaction or sealing of a Court filing must be 
narrowly tailored to serve whatever purpose justifies the redaction or sealing and must be 

otherwise consistent with the presumption in favor of public access to judicial documents. See, 
e.g., Lugosh v. Pyramid Co. of Onondaga, 435 F.3d 110, 119-20 (2d Cir. 2006).
         b.   Nothing herein is intended to alter or modify the applicability of Federal
Rule of Civil Procedure 5.2 to this action. The redactions expressly authorized by Rule 5.2 may 
be made without further application to the Court.                         
    17.  Each person who has access to Deutsche Bank Discovery Material produced by
Deutsche Bank that has been designated as Confidential or Highly Confidential shall take all 
reasonable precautions to prevent unauthorized or inadvertent disclosure of such material. 
    18.  If, in connection with this action, Deutsche Bank claims that it has inadvertently

produced Deutsche Bank Discovery Material that is subject to a claim of privilege or protection, 
including, without limitation, attorney-client privilege, attorney work product protection, data 
privacy laws, bank secrecy laws, state secrecy laws or bank examination privilege (“Inadvertently 
Disclosed Information”), such disclosure, in itself, shall not constitute or be deemed a waiver or 
forfeiture of any claim of privilege or protection with respect to the Inadvertently Disclosed 
Information or its subject matter.                                        
    19.  If Deutsche Bank makes a claim of inadvertent disclosure, the receiving party shall,
within fourteen (14) business days, return or destroy all copies of the Inadvertently Disclosed 
Information, and provide a written certification of counsel that all such information has been 
returned or destroyed.                                                    
    20.  Within fourteen (14) business days of the notification that such Inadvertently
Disclosed Information has been returned or destroyed, Deutsche Bank shall produce a privilege 
log with respect to the Inadvertently Disclosed Information.              

    21.  The receiving party may move the Court for an order compelling production of the
Inadvertently Disclosed Information. The motion shall be filed under seal, and shall not assert as 
a ground for entering such an order the fact of the inadvertent production. 
    22.  Deutsche Bank retains the burden of establishing the privileged or protected nature
of any Inadvertently Disclosed Information. Nothing in this Order shall limit the right of any party 
to request an in camera review of the Inadvertently Disclosed Information. 
    23.  Deutsche  Bank  may  designate  Deutsche  Bank  Discovery  Material  as
“Confidential” or “Highly Confidential” consistent with the terms of this Order, even if Deutsche 
Bank is no longer a named party to this action. In such circumstances, Deutsche Bank Discovery 

Material designated Confidential or Highly Confidential by the non-party Deutsche Bank shall be 
assigned the same protection as Deutsche Bank Discovery Material so designated by Deutsche 
Bank as a party to this action, and all duties applicable to a party under this Order shall apply to a 
non-party Deutsche Bank designating Deutsche Bank Discovery Material as Confidential or 
Highly Confidential. All obligations applicable under this Order to persons receiving Deutsche 
Bank Discovery Material shall apply to any person receiving Deutsche Bank Discovery Material 
from such non-party Deutsche Bank.                                        
    24.  If, at any time, any Deutsche Bank Discovery Material governed by this Order is
subpoenaed or requested by any court, administrative or legislative body, or by any other person 
or entity purporting to have authority to require the production thereof, the person to whom the 
subpoena or request is directed shall, to the extent permitted by law, promptly give written notice 
to Deutsche Bank and its counsel and include with that notice a copy of the subpoena or request. 
To the extent permitted by law, the person to whom the subpoena or request is directed also shall 
not produce documents for at least ten (10) days after notice of the subpoena is provided to 

Deutsche Bank and its counsel in order to provide Deutsche Bank a reasonable period of time in 
which to seek to quash, limit or object to the subpoena or request, or to move for any protection 
for the Deutsche Bank Discovery Material. If the person to whom the subpoena or request is 
directed is compelled by applicable law or a court order to respond to the subpoena or request in 
less than ten (10) days, the person to whom the subpoena or request is directed shall, to the extent 
permitted by law, notify Deutsche Bank and its counsel of this fact. In no event shall such Deutsche 
Bank Discovery Material subject to this Order be produced by a person receiving a subpoena or 
request without providing Deutsche Bank an opportunity to quash, limit or object, absent a court 
order to do so or as otherwise required by law. In the event that Deutsche Bank Discovery Material 

designated as “Confidential” or “Highly Confidential” under this Order is produced in response to 
a subpoena or request, the recipient of the subpoena or request shall take commercially reasonable 
steps to ensure that the protections afforded under this Order shall continue to apply to such 
Deutsche  Bank  Discovery  Material.  The  production  of  Confidential  or  Highly  Confidential 
Deutsche Bank Discovery Material pursuant to a subpoena or request shall not cause such 
Confidential or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material to lose its status as 
Confidential or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material.     
    25.  In order to expedite production of voluminous materials, if Deutsche Bank is 
producing Deutsche Bank Discovery Material previously produced to a regulator or to another 
party in another litigation, Deutsche Bank may designate those collections of documents that by 
their nature contain Confidential or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material with 
the appropriate designation, notwithstanding that some of the documents within the collection may 
not qualify for such designation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the receiving party may, pursuant 
to the procedures set forth in paragraph 8, challenge the designation of one of more particular 

documents on the grounds that it does not or they do not qualify for protection, or does not or do 
not qualify for the level of protection asserted.                         
    26.  Confidential or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material that has 
been produced, whether voluntarily, under subpoena or otherwise, to any regulator (including any 
division of any federal, state or local government in the U.S. or abroad, any division of any foreign 
government, or any industry self-governing, licensing or insuring entity), or that is subsequently 
produced to any such regulator, shall nonetheless continue to be subject to this Order and shall not 
cease to be Confidential or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material solely because 
it was or is so produced, regardless of whether such regulator made or makes such Confidential or 

Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material available to one or more third parties. 
    27.  The undersigned agree to meet and confer concerning the use of any Confidential 
or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material at hearings or at the trial of this action 
not fewer than ten (10) days prior to any such hearing or trial. Where a hearing or trial is scheduled 
on less than ten (10) days’ notice, the parties agree to meet and confer as soon as practicable after 
receiving notice, but in any event, not fewer than twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the hearing 
or trial. The use of Confidential or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material at 
hearings  or  trial  shall  not  cause  such  Confidential  or  Highly  Confidential  Deutsche  Bank 
Discovery Material to lose its status as Confidential or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank 
Discovery Material.                                                       
    28.  This  Order  shall  survive  the  termination  of  the  litigation.  The  Court  retains
jurisdiction over parties, counsel for parties and all others to whom this Order applies, for purposes 
of enforcement of this Order following the conclusion of this action. Upon written request of 

Deutsche Bank, after the final conclusion of all aspects of this action by judgment not subject to 
further appeal or by settlement, all Confidential or Highly Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery 
Material and all copies of such material shall be returned or destroyed by the receiving person, and 
so certified in writing within ninety (90) days of Deutsche Bank’s written request. Notwithstanding 
any other provision of this Order, the obligation to return or destroy all Confidential or Highly 
Confidential Deutsche Bank Discovery Material and all copies of such material upon such written 
request shall not apply to pleadings, motions, briefs, supporting affidavits, other papers filed with 
the Court, attorney notes, deposition transcripts, hearing transcripts, trial transcripts, exhibits, the 
trial record (including exhibits), Court opinions or orders, attorney-client privileged material, 

and/or work product created by counsel, a party, or a third party in connection with this litigation, 
which reflect, summarize or otherwise refer to Confidential or Highly Confidential Material, and 
copies thereof retained by counsel, so long as such material is clearly marked to reflect that it 
contains such information and the person retaining such material otherwise complies with this 
Order with respect to such retained material.                             
    29.  This Order is governed by, interpreted under, and construed and enforced in
accordance with New York law, without regard to the conflict of law principles of the State of 
New York. Any dispute between the parties regarding this Order shall be resolved by making an 
appropriate application to this Court in accordance with its rules.       
    30.  Nothing herein shall preclude any party from seeking modification of this Order or
additional protection for particular documents for good cause.            
    31.  By stipulating to the entry of this Order, no party waives any right it otherwise
would have to object to disclosing or producing any information or item on any ground not 
addressed in this Order. Similarly, no party waives any right to object on any ground to the 

admissibility or use in evidence of any of the material covered by this Order. 
    32.  During the pendency of this action only, this Court shall retain jurisdiction over all
persons subject to this Order to the extent necessary to enforce any obligations arising hereunder. 
    33.  This Stipulation and Order may be executed in counterparts.     
SO STIPULATED AND AGREED. 
 Counsel for Representative Plaintiffs          Counsel for Deutsche Bank AG 
  Vina bapa                          Za vie.   USM  ee 
 Vincent Briganti                          Elizabeth  M. Sacksteder 
 Geoffrey M. Horn                        PAUL, WEISS, RIFKIND, WHARTON & 
 Raymond P. Girnys                       GARRISON LLP 
 LOWEY DANNENBERG, P.C.            1285 Avenue of the Americas 
44 South Broadway, Suite 1100              New York, NY 10019 
 White Plains, New York 10601              Telephone: (212) 373-3000 
Telephone: (914) 997-0500                 esacksteder@paulweiss.com 
vbriganti@lowey.com 
ghorn@lowey.com 
rgimnys@lowey.com 
Lebo Lovell 
LOVELL STEWART HALEBIAN 
JACOBSON LLP 
500 Sth Avenue, Suite 2440 
New York, New York 10110 
Telephone: (212) 608-1900 
clovell@Ishllp.com 

IT IS SO ORDERED.                  □□ /
DATED:   08/24/2024                   SPLAT         LATO  □□ 
                                  THE HONORABLE VERNON S. BRODERICK 
                                  UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE 

                                  -18- 

                           EXHIBIT A                                     
                 UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
                SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                            
SONTERRA CAPITAL MASTER FUND, LTD.,                                       
RICHARD DENNIS, and FRONTPOINT EUROPEAN    Docket No. 15-cv-3538 (VSB)    
FUND, L.P., on behalf of themselves and all others                        
similarly situated,                                                       
                  Plaintiffs,                                            
              -against-                                                  
BARCLAYS BANK PLC, COOPERATIEVE                                           
CENTRALE RAIFFEISEN-BOERENLEENBANK B.A.,                                  
DEUTSCHE BANK AG, LLOYDS BANKING GROUP                                    
PLC, THE ROYAL BANK OF SCOTLAND PLC, UBS                                  
AG, JOHN DOE NOS. 1-50, and BARCLAYS CAPITAL,                             
INC.,                                                                     
                  Defendants.                                            
                  NON-DISCLOSURE AGREEMENT                               
    I,  _______________________,  acknowledge  that  I  have  read  and  understand  the 
Stipulation and Protective Order Governing Materials Produced by Deutsche Bank AG (the 
“Protective Order”) in this action. I agree that I will use Deutsche Bank Discovery Material solely 
for the prosecution or defense of this action and for no other purpose and that I am subject to the 
terms of the Protective Order. For the avoidance of doubt, I agree that I will not disclose Deutsche 

Bank Discovery Material, including Deutsche Bank Discovery Material designated as Confidential 
or Highly Confidential, except as authorized by the Protective Order, and that at the conclusion of 
the litigation I will return all Deutsche Bank Discovery Material I have received to the party or 
attorney from whom I received it. By acknowledging these obligations under the Protective Order, 
I understand that I am submitting myself to the jurisdiction of the United States District Court for 
the Southern District of New York for the purpose of any issue or dispute arising hereunder and 
that my willful violation of any term of the Protective Order could subject me to punishment for 
contempt of Court.                                                        


DATED: _____________________            ______________________________    
                                            [NAME]

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                                              
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                                             
---------------------------------------------------------- X              
                           :                                         
SONTERRA CAPITAL MASTER FUND,   :                                         
LTD., RICHARD DENNIS, and       :                                         
FRONTPOINT EUROPEAN FUND, L.P., on  :                                     
behalf of themselves and all others similarly  :  15-CV-3538 (VSB)        
situated,                       :                                         
                           :        OPINION & ORDER                  
                 Plaintiffs,  :                                      
                           :                                         
       - against -         :                                         
                           :                                         
BARCLAYS BANK PLC, COOPERATIEVE  :                                        
CENTRALE RAIFFEISEN-            :                                         
BOERENLEENBANK B.A., DEUTSCHE   :                                         
BANK AG, LLOYDS BANKING GROUP   :                                         
PLC, THE ROYAL BANK OF SCOTLAND  :                                        
PLC, UBS AG, JOHN DOE NOS. 1-50, and  :                                   
BARCLAYS CAPITAL, INC.,         :                                         
                           :                                         
                 Defendants.  :                                      
                           :                                         
---------------------------------------------------------- X              

Appearances:                                                              

Vincent Briganti                                                          
Geoffrey Horn                                                             
Lowey Dannenberg, P.C.                                                    
White Plains, New York                                                    

Christopher Lovell                                                        
Victor E. Stewart                                                         
Benjamin M. Jaccarino                                                     
Lovell Stewart Halebian Jacobson LLP                                      
New York, New York                                                        

Counsel for Representative Plaintiffs and the Proposed Class              

Elizabeth M. Sacksteder                                                   
Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison LLP                              
New York, New York                                                        

Counsel for Deutsche Bank AG                                              
VERNON S. BRODERICK, United States District Judge:                        

This action was filed on May 6, 2015, on behalf of all persons and entities that engaged 
in Sterling LIBOR-based Derivative transactions.  (Doc. 1.)  Before me is the unopposed motion 
filed by Plaintiffs Richard Dennis, Fund Liquidation Holdings LLC, and any subsequently 
named plaintiffs (collectively, “Representative Plaintiffs”) for preliminary approval of the Class 
Action Settlement with Defendant Deutsche Bank AG.  (Doc. 260.)  Because I find, under a 
preliminary evaluation, that the settlement is fair, reasonable, and the result of good faith 
negotiation, Representative Plaintiffs’ motion is GRANTED.                
     Background and Procedural History                               
I assume familiarity with the factual background and procedural history of the case as set 
forth in my previous Opinion & Order, Sonterra Cap. Master Fund, Ltd. v. Barclays Bank PLC, 
366 F. Supp. 3d 516, 518–519 (S.D.N.Y. 2018), and adopt the parties’ procedural history as set 
out in Representative Plaintiffs’ Memorandum in Support of Motion for Preliminary Approval of 
Class Action Settlement with Defendant Deutsche Bank AG.  (Doc. 261.)  Representative 

Plaintiffs ask me to (1) grant preliminary approval of the settlement, (2) conditionally certify a 
Settlement Class1 on the claims against Deutsche Bank, (3) grant preliminary approval of the 
proposed Distribution Plan, (4) appoint Representative Plaintiffs as representatives of the 
Settlement Class, (5) appoint Lowey Dannenberg, P.C. (“Lowey”) and Lovell Stewart Halebian 
Jacobson LLP (“Lovell”) as Class Counsel, (6) appoint Citibank, N.A. (“Citibank”) as the 
Escrow Agent for the Settlement, (7) appoint A.B. Data, Ltd. (“A.B. Data”) as the Settlement 
Administrator, (8) approve the proposed forms of Class Notice and the proposed Class Notice 


1 All capitalized terms are defined by the Stipulation and Agreement of Settlement as to Deutsche Bank dated March 
31, 2022 (“Settlement Agreement”), unless otherwise defined.              
plan, (9) set a schedule leading to the final evaluation of the Settlement, including the date, time, 
and place of the Fairness Hearing, and (10) stay all proceedings in the Action related to Deutsche 
Bank except those relating to Settlement approval.                        
     Legal Standards                                                 

     A.  Preliminary Approval of the Settlement                      
It is within a district court’s discretion to approve proposed class action settlements.  See 
Kelen v. World Fin. Network Nat’l Bank, 302 F.R.D. 56, 68 (S.D.N.Y. 2014).  “The compromise 
of complex litigation is encouraged by the courts and favored by public policy.” Wal-Mart 
Stores, Inc. v. Visa U.S.A., Inc., 396 F.3d 96, 114 (2d Cir. 2005) (quoting 4 ALBA CONTE & 
HERBERT B. NEWBERG, NEWBERG ON CLASS ACTIONS § 11:53, at 167 (4th ed. 2002)).  
The parties and their counsel are in a unique position to assess the potential risks of litigation, 
and thus district courts in exercising their discretion often give weight to the fact that the parties 
have chosen to settle.  See Yuzary v. HSBC Bank USA, N.A., No. 12 Civ. 3693 PGG, 2013 WL 
1832181, at *1 (S.D.N.Y. Apr. 30, 2013).                                  

Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23(e) requires judicial approval of any class action 
settlement.  Review of a proposed settlement generally involves preliminary approval followed 
by a fairness hearing.  Silver v. 31 Great Jones Rest., No. 11 CV 7442 KMW DCF, 2013 WL 
208918, at *1 (S.D.N.Y. Jan. 4, 2013).  “[C]ourts often grant preliminary settlement approval 
without requiring a hearing or a court appearance.”  Lizondro-Garcia v. Kefi LLC, 300 F.R.D. 
169, 179 (S.D.N.Y. 2014).  However, “[e]ven at the preliminary approval stage, the Court’s role 
in reviewing the proposed settlement ‘is demanding because the adversariness of litigation is 
often lost after the agreement to settle.’”  In re GSE Bonds Antitrust Litig., 414 F. Supp. 3d 686, 
692 (S.D.N.Y. 2019) (quoting Zink v. First Niagara Bank, N.A., 155 F.Supp.3d 297, 308 
(W.D.N.Y. 2016)).  Under the new, more exacting standards of the 2018 amendments to Rule 23, 
a district court must consider whether the court “will likely be able to:  (i) approve the proposal 
under Rule 23(e)(2); and (ii) certify the class for purposes of judgment on the proposal.”  In re 
Payment Card Interchange Fee & Merch. Disc. Antitrust Litig., 330 F.R.D. 11, 28 (E.D.N.Y. 

2019) (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(e)(1)(B)(i–ii)); In re GSE Bonds Antitrust Litig., 414 F. Supp. 
3d at 692 (same).  Courts conducting this analysis “must make a preliminary evaluation as to 
whether the settlement is fair, reasonable and adequate.”  In re Currency Conversion Fee 
Antitrust Litig., No. 01 MDL 1409, M-21-95, 2006 WL 3247396, at *5 (S.D.N.Y. Nov. 8, 2006) 
(internal quotation marks omitted).  In making this determination, courts consider the (1) 
adequacy of representation, (2) existence of arm’s-length negotiations, (3) adequacy of relief, 
and (4) equitableness of treatment of class members.  Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(e)(2).  In addition to 
these four factors, courts in the Second Circuit also consider whether the settlement is fair, 
reasonable, and adequate under the nine factors2 established in City of Detroit v. Grinnell Corp., 
495 F.2d 448, 463 (2d Cir. 1974),3 which overlap with Rule 23(e)(2)(C)–(D).  

     B.  Conditional Settlement Class Certification and Appointment of Class 
       Counsel                                                       

Conditional settlement class certification and the appointment of class counsel have 
several practical purposes “including avoiding the costs of litigating class status while facilitating 
a global settlement, ensuring notification of all class members of the terms of the proposed 

2 The Grinnell factors are:  (1) the complexity, expense and likely duration of the litigation; (2) the reaction of the 
class to the settlement; (3) the stage of the proceedings and the amount of discovery completed; (4) the risks of 
establishing liability; (5) the risks of establishing damages; (6) the risks of maintaining the class action through the 
trial; (7) the ability of the defendants to withstand a greater judgment; (8) the range of reasonableness of the 
settlement fund in light of the best possible recovery; and (9) the range of reasonableness of the settlement fund to a 
possible recovery in light of all the attendant risks of litigation.  See Grinnell, 495 F.2d at 463. 
3 The Advisory Committee Notes to the 2018 amendments indicate that the four new Rule 23 factors were intended 
to supplement rather than displace these “Grinnell” factors.  See 2018 Advisory Notes to Fed. R. Civ. P. 23, Subdiv. 
(e)(2) (“2018 Advisory Note”).                                            
settlement agreement, and setting the date and time of the final approval hearing.”  Almonte v. 
Marina Ice Cream Corp., No. 1:16-CV-00660 (GBD), 2016 WL 7217258, at *2 (S.D.N.Y. Dec. 
8, 2016).  The proposed settlement class must meet the requirements of Federal Rule of Civil 
Procedure 23(a) and (b)(3).  Under Rule 23(a), class certification is appropriate if “(1) the class is 

so numerous that joinder of all members is impracticable; (2) there are questions of law or fact 
common to the class; (3) the claims ... of the representative parties are typical of the claims ... of 
the class; and (4) the representative parties will fairly and adequately protect the interests of the 
class.”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(a)(1)-(4).  “The party seeking class certification bears the burden of 
establishing each of these elements by a ‘preponderance of the evidence.’”  Lizondro-Garcia, 
300 F.R.D. at 174 (quoting Teamsters Local 445 Freight Div. Pension Fund v. Bombardier Inc., 
546 F.3d 196, 202 (2d Cir. 2008)).  Once each of these four threshold requirements are met, 
“class certification is appropriate if the action also satisfies one of the three alternative criteria set 
forth in Rule 23(b).”  Lizondro-Garcia, 300 F.R.D. at 174.  To certify a class under Rule 
23(b)(3), as the parties seek to do here, a court must also find “that the questions of law or fact 

common to class members predominate over any questions affecting only individual members, 
and that a class action is superior to other available methods for fairly and efficiently 
adjudicating the controversy.”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(b)(3).                 
     Discussion                                                      
     A.   Preliminary Approval of the Class Settlement               
After reviewing Representative Plaintiffs’ submissions, including the Memorandum of 
Law in support of their motion, (Doc. 261, “Mem.”), the Joint Declaration of Vincent Briganti 
and Christopher Lovell in Support of Representative Plaintiffs’ Motion for Preliminary Approval 
of Class Action Settlement, (Doc. 262, “Joint Decl.”), the stipulation of settlement, (Doc. 262-1, 
“Settlement”), and all other attached exhibits, (see Doc. 262-2–9), I find that the settlement terms 
merit preliminary approval.                                               
          1.  Adequacy of Representation                             
“Determination of adequacy typically entails inquiry as to whether:  (1) plaintiff’s 

interests are antagonistic to the interest of other members of the class and (2) plaintiff’s attorneys 
are qualified, experienced and able to conduct the litigation.” Cordes & Co. Fin. Servs. v. A.G. 
Edwards & Sons, Inc., 502 F.3d 91, 99 (2d Cir. 2007) (internal quotation marks omitted).  Here, 
Representative Plaintiffs’ interests are aligned with those of the class as they transacted in 
Sterling LIBOR-based Derivatives during the Class Period.4  (Mem. 6.)  Representative 
Plaintiffs’ Counsel have demonstrated that they are qualified, experienced, and able to conduct 
the litigation, as evidenced by their extensive antitrust and Commodity Exchange Act (“CEA”) 
class action experience and efforts negotiating this Settlement.  (Mem. 6.)  Therefore, Rule 
23(e)(2)(A)’s adequacy of representation prong weighs in favor of approval.   
          2.  Existence of Arm’s-Length Negotiations                 

“If the Court finds that the Settlement is the product of arm’s length negotiations 
conducted by experienced counsel knowledgeable in complex class litigation, the Settlement will 
enjoy a presumption of fairness.”  In re Austrian & German Bank Holocaust Litig., 80 F. Supp. 
2d 164, 173–74 (S.D.N.Y. 2000).  The Settlement appears to be the result of extensive and good-
faith negotiations between Representative Plaintiffs and Deutsche Bank, all of whom have a 
strong understanding of the risks of litigation and benefits of the Settlement.  (Mem. 7–8.)   
The Settlement was based on an in-depth investigation into the strengths and weakness of 


4 Under the Settlement, the Class Period as defined by the Settlement is from January 1, 2005 through at least 
December 31, 2010.  (See Doc. 262-5.)                                     
the case conducted by Representative Plaintiffs’ Counsel, Lowey Dannenberg, P.C. and Lovell 
Stewart Halebian Jacobson LLP, which are firms with extensive antitrust and CEA class action 
experience on behalf of some of the nation’s largest pension funds and institutional investors.  
(Id. 6–7; see also Joint Decl. ¶¶ 32–35.)  Representative Plaintiffs’ Counsel’s efforts included:  

(i) conducting a pre-filing investigation of relevant facts; (ii) drafting the complaints; (iii) 
opposing Defendants’ motion to dismiss; (iv) appealing the dismissal of the Action; (v) and 
negotiating the proposed Settlement; and (vi) developing the proposed Distribution Plan.  (Mem. 
7; Joint Decl. ¶¶ 36–37.)  Defendant’s counsel—Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison 
LLP—is a preeminent international law firm with extensive experience in antitrust litigation and 
class actions.  (Mem. 7.)  The parties began negotiations in September 2021 to discuss a potential 
settlement amount, cooperation, release, and settlement termination rights.  (Id. 3.)  After more 
than three months of negotiations, the parties signed a term sheet on January 3, 2022, and after 
continued negotiations, executed the Settlement on March 31, 2022.  (Id.)  I find that all of the 
above suggests that the settlement is the result of good faith and arm’s-length negotiations.  

Therefore, in light of my findings with regard to Class Counsel and the good faith and arm’s-
length negotiations, a presumption of fairness attaches to the Settlement.    
          3.  Adequacy of Relief                                     
In assessing the adequacy of a settlement under Rule 23(e)(2)(C)(i), “courts may need to 
forecast the likely range of possible classwide recoveries and the likelihood of success in 
obtaining such results.”  In re Payment Card, 330 F.R.D. at 36 (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 23 
advisory committee’s note to 2018 amendment).  This inquiry overlaps with the Grinnell factors 
of “complexity, expense, and likely duration of the litigation” along with “the risks of 
establishing liability,” “the risks of establishing damages” and “the risks of maintaining a class 
through the trial.”  See Grinnell, 495 F.2d at 463.                       
Representative Plaintiffs faced significant litigation risks, in large part due to the 
complexity of the alleged manipulation that occurred between and among at least six institutions 
over a six-year period.  (See Mem. 10.)  Inherent in the complexity of the allegations is the 

inevitability of lengthy and costly discovery and motion practice if the case continued through 
litigation.  (See Mem. 11–12) (outlining each sides’ anticipated discovery motions, Daubert 
motions, class certification motions, and pre-trial motions).  Accordingly, these factors weigh in 
favor of preliminary approval.                                            
Under Rule 23(e)(2)(c)(ii), a court must evaluate the “effectiveness of any proposed 
method of distributing relief to the class, including the method of processing class-member 
claims.”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(e)(2)(c)(ii).  The proposed Distribution Plan, which was created with 
the assistance of experts to efficiently distribute funds and encourage participation, is similar to 
other plans approved in this District.  (See Doc. 261 at 15.)  Therefore, I find that the Distribution 
Plan is fair, reasonable, and adequate.                                   

In assessing the adequacy of the relief, Rule 23 also requires the court to examine the 
proposed attorneys’ fees.  Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(e)(2)(c)(iii).  The requested attorneys’ fees, which 
are limited to no more than one-third of the Settlement Amount, or $1.67 million, (Doc. 261 at 
17), net of Representative Plaintiffs’ Counsel’s litigation expenses not to exceed $600,000, (id. at 
18), appear reasonable at this point.  “Courts in this District have approved fees as high as 33.5% 
from comparable class settlement funds, finding that they are ‘well within the applicable range of 
reasonable percentage fund awards.’”  In re GSE Bonds Antitrust Litig., 414 F. Supp. 3d at 695 
(quoting In re DDAPV Direct Purchaser Antitrust Litigation, No. 05-2237, 2011 WL 12627961 
(S.D.N.Y. Nov. 28, 2011) (awarding 33.5% from a class settlement find of $20.25 million)); see 
also In re Oxycontin Antitrust Litig., No. 04-md-1603-SHS, ECF No. 360 (S.D.N.Y. Jan. 25, 
2011) (awarding 33.5% from a class settlement fund of $16 million).  However, before 
attorneys’ fees can be finally approved, additional materials will need to be submitted and 
examined, such as attorneys’ affidavits and billing records.  In light of these factors, I 

preliminarily find that the proposed Settlement provides adequate relief to the Class. 
          4.  Equitableness of Treatment of Class Members            
Rule 23(e)(2)(d) finally requires the Court to consider whether “the proposal treats class 
members equitably relative to each other.”  Fed. R. Civ. P 23(e)(2)(D).  I find that the pro rata 
distribution of the Settlement Fund among Authorized Claimants and the release for all Class 
Members of claims against Deutsche Bank for claims based on the same factual predicate of this 
action are sufficient to show that the Settlement Class is treated equitably.  See In re Payment 
Card, 330 F.R.D. at 47 (finding that “pro rata distribution scheme is sufficiently equitable”).   
          5.  Remaining Grinnell Factors                             
The Grinnell factors not expressly assessed under Rule 23(e)(2)(C)(i) include “[] the 

reaction of the class to the settlement; [] the stage of the proceedings and the amount of 
discovery completed; . . . [] the ability of the defendants to withstand a greater judgment; [] the 
range of reasonableness of the settlement fund in light of the best possible recovery; and [] the 
range of reasonableness of the settlement fund to a possible recovery in light of all the attendant 
risks of litigation.”  Grinnell, 495 F.2d at 463.                         
I find that all five outstanding Grinnell factors favor preliminary approval of the 
Settlement.  First, the Representative Plaintiffs favor the Settlement, and their approval is 
probative of the Class’s reaction at this time since notice has not yet been issued.  Second, I find 
that Representative Plaintiffs “have obtained a sufficient understanding of the case to gauge the 
strengths and weaknesses of their claims and the adequacy of the settlement.”  In re AOL Time 
Warner, Inc., No. 02 CIV. 5575 (SWK), 2006 WL 903236, at *10 (S.D.N.Y. Apr. 6, 2006).  
Third, despite the fact that Deutsche Bank could potentially withstand a greater judgment than 
the proposed Settlement Amount, this fact “does not, standing alone, indicate that the settlement 

is unreasonable or inadequate.”  In re Global Crossing Sec. and ERISA Litig., 225 F.R.D. 436, 
460 (S.D.N.Y. 2004) (internal quotation marks omitted).  Finally, in considering the Settlement 
in light of the best possible recovery and the risks of litigation, I find that the Settlement provides 
adequate recovery for the Class, not only through its monetary value, but also through the 
cooperation of Deutsche Bank in identifying potential Class Members and further validating the 
Distribution Plan if necessary, and the value of serving as an “ice-breaker” settlement to 
potentially facilitate future settlements.  See In re GSE Bonds, 414 F. Supp. 3d at 697 
(“[Deutsche Bank] has offered cooperation which has added significant value to its settlement 
agreement. . . . DB also added ‘significant value’ by being a settlement ‘ice-breaker,’ or first 
party to settle, potentially helping to spur other parties to settlement.”) (citation omitted).    

     B.   Conditional Certification of Class                         
As required under Rule 23(a), Representative Plaintiffs have demonstrated that the class 
is sufficiently numerous, that there are common issues across the class, that the Representative 
Plaintiffs’ claims are typical of the class, and that the Representative Plaintiffs and their 
attorneys would be effective Class Representatives and Class Counsel, respectively.  I also find 
that, as required by Rule 23(b)(3), the common issues identified by Plaintiffs predominate over 
any individual issues in the case such that class action is superior in this context to other modes 
of litigating this dispute.  Because the class certification request is made in the context of 
settlement only, I need not address the issue of manageability.  See Soler v. Fresh Direct, LLC, 
No. 20 CIV. 3431 (AT), 2023 WL 2492977, at *6 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 14, 2023).  Accordingly, 
pursuant to Rule 23(e), I certify this Class for the purposes of settlement, notice and award 
distribution only.                                                        
     C.   Approval of Notice to the Class, Settlement Administrator, and Escrow 
          Agent                                                      

Rule 23(c)(2)(B) requires that:                                      

     [T]he court must direct to class members the best notice that is 
     practicable under the circumstances, including individual notice to 
     all members who can be identified through reasonable effort. . . . 
     The  notice  must  clearly  and  concisely  state  in  plain,  easily 
     understood language:  (i) the nature of the action; (ii) the definition 
     of the class certified; (iii) the class claims, issues, or defenses; (iv) 
     that a class member may enter an appearance through an attorney if 
     the member so desires; (v) that the court will exclude from the class 
     any member who requests exclusion; (vi) the time and manner for 
     requesting exclusion; and (vii) the binding effect of a class judgment 
     on members under Rule 23(c)(3).                                 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(c)(2)(B).  I have reviewed the proposed plan for providing notice to the Class, 
which involves (1) sending Post Card Notice by First-Class Mail to potential Class Members, 
(Doc. 262-3), (2) making the Long-Form Notice, (Doc. 262-4), and the Proof of Claim Form, 
(Doc. 262-6), available on the Settlement Website5 for Class Members to review and download, 
and (3) publishing the Short-Form Notice, (Doc. 262-5), in various periodicals, industry 
publications, and through a digital campaign, (Mem. 24).  After review, I conclude that the form 
and manner of the proposed notice constitutes the best notice practicable under the circumstances 
and meets the requirements of due process.  The plan also satisfies all of the seven elements of 
Rule 23(c)(2)(B) identified above.  Additionally, I adopt Representative Plaintiffs’ 
recommendation that A.B. Data be appointed as Settlement Administrator.  Representative 

5 The “Settlement Website” provided is www.sterlingliborsettlement.com.   
Plaintiffs’ request to designate Citibank as Escrow Agent to maintain the Settlement Fund is 
granted based on Citibank’s previous experience in other settlements in this District. 
       D.  Proposed Schedule of Events 
 I adopt Representative Plaintiffs’ proposed schedule in full.  However, the parties shall 
inform me within two weeks of the published date of this Opinion & Order whether they would 
like to schedule a Fairness Hearing prior to the two hundred and twenty-five (225) calendar days 
after entry of the Preliminary Approval Order as originally requested. 
 IV.    Conclusion 
 For the foregoing reasons, Representative Plaintiffs’ unopposed motion for preliminary 
approval of the settlement is GRANTED.  Accordingly, the parties are hereby 
 ORDERED to re-submit a text-editable word document of the proposed order setting 
forth the settlement procedure and schedule.  (Doc. 263.)  I will approve the proposed procedure 
in a separate order to be filed in tandem with this Opinion & Order. 
 IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the parties inform me within two weeks of the 
published date of this Opinion & Order whether they would like to schedule a Fairness Hearing 
prior to the two hundred and twenty-five (225) calendar days after entry of the Preliminary 
Approval Order as originally requested. 
 The Clerk of Court is respectfully directed to close the open motions on the docket. 
SO ORDERED. 
Dated: June 1, 2023 
New York, New York                     f          . 4 
                                   Vernon S. Broderick 
                                   United States District Judge 

                                    12

---

USDC SDNY 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                       DOCUMENT 
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                    ELECTRONICALLY FILED  . 
AR         DOC #;__              □ 
SONTERRA CAPITAL MASTER FUND, LTD.,     —:          DATE FILED: __ 876/201) 
RICHARD DENNIS, and FRONTPOINT                         : 
EUROPEAN FUND, L.P., on behalf of                      : 
themselves and all others similarly situated,          : 
                      Plaintiffs,                 : 
                                                  :             15-CV-3538 (VSB) 
          -against-                               : 
                                                  :           OPINION & ORDER 
BARCLAYS BANK PLC, COOPERATIEVE                        : 
CENTRALE RAIFFEISEN-BOERENLEENBANK _                   : 
B.A., DEUTSCHE BANK AG, LLOYDS BANKING                 : 
GROUP PLC, THE ROYAL BANK OF SCOTLAND                  : 
PLC, UBS AG, JOHN DOE NOS. 1-50, and                   : 
BARCLAYS CAPITAL, INC.,                                : 
                      Defendants.                 : 

Appearances: 
Christian Levis 
Geoffrey Milbank Horn 
Raymond Peter Girnys 
Vincent Briganti 
Margaret Ciavarella MacLean 
Peter Dexter St. Phillip, Jr. 
Sitso W. Bediako 
Lowey Dannenberg, P.C. 
White Plains, New York 
Benjamin Martin Jaccarino 
Christopher Lovell 
Lovell Stewart Halebian  Jacobson LLP 
New York, New York 
James Anthony Diehl 
The Law Office of  Jamison A. Diehl LLC 
New York, New York 
Counsel for Plaintiff  FrontPoint European Fund, L.P. 

Peter Sullivan                                                            
Eric Jonathan Stock                                                       
Jefferson Eliot Bell                                                      
Lawrence Jay Zweifach                                                     
Mark Adam Kirsch                                                          
Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher, LLP                                              
New York, New York                                                        
Counsel for Defendant UBS AG                                              

VERNON S. BRODERICK, United States District Judge:                        
Plaintiff FrontPoint European Fund, L.P. (“FrontPoint”) brings this putative antitrust 
class action lawsuit against Defendant UBS AG (“UBS”) for allegedly conspiring with other 
financial institutions to manipulate the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) for British 
Pound Sterling.  Before me is FrontPoint’s motion to substitute Fund Liquidation Holdings, LLC 
(“FLH”), individually, and as assignee of and attorney-in-fact for FrontPoint, pursuant to Federal 
Rule of Civil Procedure 17(a)(3).  Because I conclude that FrontPoint did not assign the claims at 
issue in this litigation to FLH, FrontPoint’s motion to substitute is DENIED.  Furthermore, since 
FrontPoint filed its certificate of cancellation prior to the commencement of this lawsuit, 
FrontPoint lacks capacity to maintain this lawsuit and I therefore grant UBS’s request that 
FrontPoint’s claims be dismissed in their entirety.                       
I.   Background1                                                     
This action arises out of alleged manipulation and price fixing of the Sterling LIBOR by 
numerous financial institutions,2 which allegedly harmed purchasers and sellers of financial 
instruments that were in some way connected to LIBOR.  (CAC ¶¶ 6–7.)  In 2007, FrontPoint—a 

Delaware limited partnership—entered into swap transactions with UBS, the price of which was 
allegedly affected by UBS’s manipulation of Sterling LIBOR.  (Id. ¶¶ 38, 209, 211.) 
On July 13, 2011, as FrontPoint was preparing to wind up and cease operations, 
FrontPoint and related entities3 entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (“APA”) with FLH.  
(FrontPoint Br. 1.)4  Pursuant to the APA, FrontPoint “absolutely, unconditionally and 
irrevocably s[old], assign[ed], convey[ed] and transfer[red]” to FLH all of FrontPoint’s “right, 
title and interest” in certain of FrontPoint’s assets.  (APA § 1.1.)  The APA also appointed FLH 
as FrontPoint’s attorney-in-fact and granted FLH the authority to take certain actions on 
FrontPoint’s behalf.  (Id. § 5.3.)  The APA further provided that the agreement would be 
“governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of New York.”  (Id. § 6.6.)  


1 A detailed summary of the facts set forth in the Consolidated Amended Class Action Complaint (“CAC,” Doc. 95), 
can be found in my Opinion & Order granting in part and denying in part Defendants’ motion to dismiss this lawsuit 
pursuant to Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1), 12(b)(2), and 12(b)(6) (“12/21/18 O&O,” Doc. 191).  I 
assume familiarity with the facts set forth in my 12/21/18 O&O and recite herein only those facts necessary to 
decide this motion.                                                       
2 In addition to UBS, these financial institutions included Barclays Bank PLC; Barclays Capital, Inc.; Coöperatieve 
Centrale Raiffeisen-Boerenleenbank B.A.; Deutsche Bank AG; Lloyds Banking Group PLC; and the Royal Bank of 
Scotland PLC (collectively, “Defendants”).  (See CAC.)  All Defendants other than UBS were previously dismissed 
from this action.  (See 12/21/18 O&O, at 3–4.)                            
3 These entities are FrontPoint European Fund, L.P. (Plaintiff in the instant action); FrontPoint Asian Event Driven 
Fund, L.P. (“FrontPoint Asia”); FrontPoint Australian Opportunities Trust; FrontPoint Consumer and Industrials 
Fund, L.P.; FrontPoint Financial Services Fund, L.P.; FrontPoint Healthcare Flagship Enhanced Fund, L.P.; 
FrontPoint Healthcare Flagship Fund, L.P.; FrontPoint Financial Horizons Fund, L.P.; FrontPoint Healthcare 
Horizons Fund, L.P.; FrontPoint Partners Trading Fund, L.P.; and FrontPoint Technology Fund, L.P. (collectively, 
the “FrontPoint Entities”).  (APA Schedule I.)  (“APA” refers to the July 13, 2011 Asset Purchase Agreement 
between the FrontPoint entities (as sellers) and FLH (as buyer), attached as Exhibit A to the Declaration of Geoffrey 
M. Horn in Support of Plaintiff’s Motion for Substitution, filed February 5, 2019, (Doc. 203).)  
4 “FrontPoint Br.” refers to Plaintiff FrontPoint European Fund, L.P.’s Memorandum of Law in Support of Its 
Motion for Substitution, filed February 5, 2019.  (Doc. 202.)             
On March 9, 2012, FrontPoint filed its Certificate of Cancellation of Certificate of Limited 
Partnership with the Delaware Secretary of State.  (See Bell Decl. Ex. 2.)5   
Notwithstanding the fact that FrontPoint had ceased operations in 2012, FrontPoint—
along with Richard Dennis—filed a complaint against Defendants on January 21, 2016, in which 

FrontPoint alleged that it “is a Delaware limited partnership with its principal place of business 
in Greenwich, Connecticut.”  See FrontPoint European Fund, L.P. v. Barclays Bank plc, No. 
16-cv-464, ECF No. 1, ¶ 36.  On February 16, 2016, FrontPoint and Dennis’s action was 
consolidated with the instant case, which had been filed by Sonterra Capital Master Fund, Ltd. 
(“Sonterra”) on May 6, 2015.  (See Doc. 91.)  Plaintiffs FrontPoint, Sonterra, and Dennis filed a 
Consolidated Amended Class Action Complaint on February 25, 2016.  (Doc. 95.)  The CAC—
which also described FrontPoint as a live entity, (see CAC ¶ 38 (“Plaintiff FrontPoint is a 
Delaware limited partnership with its principal place of business in Greenwich, 
Connecticut.”))—asserted federal claims under the Sherman Antitrust Act (“Sherman Act”), 15 
U.S.C. § 1, et seq.; the Commodity Exchange Act, 7 U.S.C. § 1, et seq.; and the Racketeer 

Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, 18 U.S.C. § 1961, et seq.; and also asserted common 
law claims for breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing and unjust 
enrichment, (CAC ¶¶ 234–319).                                             
On April 11, 2016, Defendants moved to dismiss the CAC in its entirety for lack of 
subject matter jurisdiction and personal jurisdiction, and for failure to state a claim, pursuant to 
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1), 12(b)(2), and (12)(b)(6).  (See Doc. 99.)  On 
November 6, 2017—while Defendants’ motion to dismiss was pending—Plaintiffs submitted a 


5 “Bell Decl.” refers to the Declaration of Jefferson E. Bell in Support of UBS’s Memorandum of Law in Opposition 
to Plaintiff’s Motion for Substitution, filed March 5, 2019.  (Doc. 219.)  
letter requesting a pre-motion conference in advance of seeking leave to substitute FLH as a 
plaintiff in place of both FrontPoint and Sonterra under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 17(a)(3).  
(Doc. 171.)  In that letter, FrontPoint and Sonterra explained that they were contacted by 
Defendants in October 2017 regarding certain inaccuracies in the CAC—namely the references 

to FrontPoint and Sonterra as “live” entities.  (Id. at 1.)  FrontPoint and Sonterra acknowledged 
that both entities had long since ceased operations but asserted that, prior to doing so, they had 
each assigned and transferred their respective rights to bring the instant lawsuit to FLH.  (Id.)6   
Accordingly, FrontPoint and Sonterra argued that substitution of FLH into the action, both 
individually and as assignee and attorney-in-fact for FrontPoint and Sonterra, would address any 
potential concerns relating to the fact that FrontPoint and Sonterra were “no longer in business.”  
(Id. at 1–2.)  In a letter dated November 9, 2017, Defendants noted their opposition to FrontPoint 
and Sonterra’s substitution request but asserted that I should address Defendants’ motion to 
dismiss prior to entertaining Plaintiffs’ request given that a ruling in Defendants’ favor on that 
motion would “render the proposed substitution motion moot.”  (Doc. 172, at 1.) 

On December 21, 2018, I issued an Opinion & Order dismissing all of Plaintiffs’ claims, 
with the exception of FrontPoint’s antitrust and unjust enrichment claims against UBS.  (See 
12/21/18 O&O, at 3–4.)  The 12/21/18 O&O did not address the substance of FrontPoint’s 
substitution request, but rather instructed FrontPoint to file its “motion to substitute pursuant to 
Rule 17(a)(3), limited in scope to the surviving claims.”  (Id. at 10 n.10, 68.)  On February 5, 
2019, FrontPoint filed the instant motion to substitute, (Doc. 201), along with a memorandum of 
law and supporting declarations with exhibits, (Docs. 202–05).  UBS filed its opposition to 


6 According to Plaintiffs, Sonterra assigned certain rights to FLH in an August 2012 agreement.  (See Doc. 171, at 
1.)  Because the 12/21/18 O&O dismissed all of Sonterra’s claims, (see 12/21/18 O&O, at 3–4), the instant motion 
for substitution is limited to FrontPoint.                                
FrontPoint’s motion on March 5, 2019, (Doc. 218), along with a declaration with exhibits in 
support, (Doc. 219); and FrontPoint filed its reply and supporting declarations with exhibits on 
March 18, 2019, (Docs. 222–24).7                                          
II.  Discussion                                                      

     A.   Motion for Substitution                                    
Having reviewed the terms of the Asset Purchase Agreement, I conclude that FLH may 
not be substituted into this lawsuit because the APA did not assign to FLH the right to bring 
either the Sherman Act claims or the common law unjust enrichment claim at issue here.  
               1.  Applicable Law                                    
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 17(a)(1) mandates that a lawsuit be “prosecuted in the 
name of the real party in interest.”  See Cortlandt St. Recovery Corp. v. Hellas Telecomms. 
S.a.r.l, 790 F.3d 411, 420 (2d Cir. 2015) (“The real party in interest principle embodied in Rule 
17 ensures that only a person who possesses the right to enforce a claim and who has a 
significant interest in the litigation can bring the claim.” (internal quotation marks omitted)).  In 

the event the real party in interest is not named as a plaintiff, a court may not dismiss the action 
for failure to prosecute in the name of the real party in interest “until, after an objection, a 
reasonable time has been allowed for the real party in interest to ratify, join, or be substituted 
into the action.”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 17(a)(3).  “A Rule 17(a) substitution of plaintiffs should be 
liberally allowed when the change is merely formal and in no way alters the original complaint’s 
factual allegations as to the events or the participants.”  Advanced Magnetics, Inc. v. Bayfront 
Partners, Inc., 106 F.3d 11, 20 (2d Cir. 1997).  Courts ordinarily grant leave to substitute if “(1) 

7 Both FrontPoint and UBS have also moved for partial reconsideration of the 12/21/18 O&O.  (Docs. 196, 198.)  
However, because I conclude herein that (1) FLH may not be substituted as a plaintiff in this action, and (2) all of 
FrontPoint’s claims should be dismissed because FrontPoint lacks capacity to maintain this lawsuit, both 
FrontPoint’s and UBS’s motions for partial reconsideration of the 12/21/18 O&O are denied as moot. 
‘[t]he complaint’s only pertinent flaw was the identity of the party pursuing those claims.  In 
other words, the proposed amended complaint sought only to substitute one name for another; 
the factual and legal allegations of the complaint would remain unaltered;’ (2) ‘there was [no] 
indication of bad faith . . . or an effort to deceive or prejudice the defendants’ and (3) ‘the 

proposed substitution . . . [does not] threaten to prejudice the defendants.’”  Kinra v. Chi. Bridge 
& Iron Co., No. 17 Civ. 4251 (LGS), 2018 WL 2371030, at *3 (S.D.N.Y. May 24, 2018) 
(alteration in original) (quoting Cortlandt, 790 F.3d at 422).  On the other hand, courts will deny 
leave to substitute where the previous misjoinder was “deliberate or tactical.”  Advanced 
Magnetics, 106 F.3d at 21.                                                
“In general, claims or choses in action may be freely transferred or assigned to others”; 
however, in order to make that assignment valid, “the owner must manifest an intention to make 
the assignee the owner of the claim.”  Id. at 17 (internal quotation marks omitted).  Where a valid 
assignment has been executed, the assignee is “the real party in interest” and “the right to sue is 
exclusively” the assignee’s.  Dennis v. JPMorgan Chase & Co. (“BBSW”), 342 F. Supp. 3d 404, 

409 n.6 (S.D.N.Y. 2018) (quoting Rodriguez v. Compass Shipping Co., 617 F.2d 955, 958 (2d 
Cir. 1980)).  However, “if the accrued causes of action are not expressly included in the 
assignment, the assignee will not be able to prosecute them.”  John Wiley & Sons, Inc. v. DRK 
Photo, 882 F.3d 394, 404 (2d Cir. 2018) (internal quotation marks omitted); see also Cortlandt, 
790 F.3d at 419 (“An assignment . . . which does not transfer ownership of claims, is, on its own, 
insufficient to permit a purported assignee to sue on those claims in [the assignee’s] name.” 
(internal quotation marks omitted)).  This rule applies with particular force in the antitrust 
context, where, in order “[t]o effect a transfer of the right to bring an antitrust claim, the 
transferee must expressly assign the right to bring that cause of action, either by making specific 
reference to the antitrust claim or by making an unambiguous assignment of causes of action in a 
manner that would clearly encompass the antitrust claim.”  DNAML Pty, Ltd. v. Apple Inc., No. 
13cv6516 (DLC), 2015 WL 9077075, at *3 (S.D.N.Y. Dec. 16, 2015) (collecting cases); see 
also Gulfstream III Assocs., Inc. v. Gulfstream Aerospace Corp., 995 F.2d 425, 440 (3d Cir. 

1993) (“[G]eneral assignments, without specific reference to antitrust claims, cannot validly 
transfer the right to pursue those claims.”).  “In determining whether [an a]greement has 
effectively made an assignment of the right to bring an antitrust claim, ordinary principles of 
contract law will be applied.”  DNAML, 2015 WL 9077075, at *4.            
               2.  Application                                       
The two surviving claims at issue in this litigation are the federal antitrust claim pursuant 
to the Sherman Act and the unjust enrichment claim under New York law.  Although FrontPoint 
conclusorily asserts that “FLH is and always has been the real party in interest in this case,” 
(FrontPoint Reply 1),8 a review of the APA reveals that FrontPoint did not transfer to FLH the 
right to sue on either of these claims.                                   

Pursuant to the terms of the APA, FrontPoint assigned to FLH FrontPoint’s “right, title 
and interest in all of the Assets,” (APA § 1.1), which are defined, in pertinent part, as “all of 
[FrontPoint’s] right, title and interest in and to any and all Recovery Rights,” (id. Art. II).  
“Recovery Rights,” in turn, are defined as “all monetary, legal and other rights held by or 
accruing to [FrontPoint] in respect of [any] Claim.”  (Id.)  “Claims” are subdivided into 
“Existing Claims” and “Future Claims.”  (Id.)9  “Future Claims”—the relevant term for the 

8 “FrontPoint Reply” refers to Plaintiff FrontPoint European Fund, L.P.’s Reply Memorandum of Law in Further 
Support of Its Motion for Substitution, filed March 18, 2019.  (Doc. 222.) 
9 The APA defines “Existing Claims” and “Future Claims” in similar terms; however, “Existing Claims” extend 
only to those claims that had been filed as of the date the APA was executed (July 13, 2011).  (APA Art. II.)  The 
claims at issue here were not filed until January 21, 2016, and therefore clearly do not satisfy the APA’s definition 
of “Existing Claims.”  See FrontPoint European Fund, L.P., No. 16-cv-464, ECF No. 1. 
purpose of the instant motion—is defined as                               
all claims of [FrontPoint] to Recovery Rights related to the ownership of, or any 
transaction in, any Included Securities . . . as to which no Case has been filed as of 
the date hereof arising out of:  (i) any future securities class action lawsuit or any 
Judgment thereon to the extent related to [FrontPoint]’s ownership of, or any 
transaction in, any Included Securities . . . .  Future Claims do not include Recovery 
Rights in respect of causes of action and interests in any state or federal common 
law claim, any non-securities related claim, or any claim related to the bankruptcy 
of Lehman Brothers.                                                  
(Id. (emphasis added).)  In sum, FrontPoint assigned to FLH its claims relating to future 
“securities class action lawsuit[s],” and—for the avoidance of doubt—the APA expressly states 
that the assignment does not extend to other types of lawsuits, including those involving “any 
state or federal common law claim” or any “non-securities related claim.”  (Id.)   
Considering FrontPoint’s Sherman Act claim first, I note that the APA makes no 
reference to the Sherman Act specifically or to “antitrust claims” generally.  The APA also fails 
to make “an unambiguous assignment of causes of action in a manner that would clearly 
encompass the antitrust claim.”  DNAML, 2015 WL 9077075, at *3.  Rather, the APA 
specifically defines the claims assigned to FLH to exclude all claims other than those pertaining 
to “securities class action lawsuit[s].”  (APA Art. II.)                  
FrontPoint asserts that the term “securities class action lawsuit” should be read to 
encompass “any kind of class action lawsuit . . . related to the financial products [in which] 
FrontPoint transacted,” (FrontPoint Br. 5); however, I find that the text of the APA simply 
cannot be read as including “any kind of class action lawsuit” related to FrontPoint’s transaction 
in financial products.  “Securities class action lawsuit” is not a defined term in the APA and 
should therefore be accorded its everyday meaning.  See 1070 Park Ave. Corp. v. Fireman’s 
Fund Ins. Co., 313 F. Supp. 3d 528, 535 (S.D.N.Y. 2018) (“New York courts construe terms in a 
contract in accordance with their ‘plain and ordinary meaning.’” (quoting Fed. Ins. Co. v. Am. 
Home Assur. Co., 639 F.3d 557, 567 (2d Cir. 2011))).  A “securities class action lawsuit” is 
commonly understood to refer to a lawsuit litigated as a class action based on alleged violations 
of the securities laws—namely (in the federal context), the Securities Act of 1933 and the 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934.  See, e.g., Querub v. Hong Kong, 649 F. App’x 55, 56 (2d Cir. 

2016) (summary order) (analyzing a “securities class action . . . alleging that [defendants] 
violated Section 11 of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange 
Act of 1934”); In re Prestige Brands Holdings, Inc. Sec. Litig., No. 05 Civ. 6924(CLB), 2006 
WL 6900987, at *1 (S.D.N.Y. Nov. 9, 2006) (describing a “securities class action suit on behalf 
of purchasers of stock . . . seeking remedies under the Securities Act of 1933 . . . and the 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934”).  Furthermore, courts routinely distinguish between securities 
class actions and cases like the purported antitrust class action that FrontPoint has brought here.  
See, e.g., Masters v. Wilhelmina Model Agency, Inc., 473 F.3d 423, 437 (2d Cir. 2007) 
(distinguishing between “securities class actions” and “antitrust class actions” and noting that the 
“[Private Securities Litigation Reform Act] is not applicable to antitrust class actions”); In re 

LIBOR-Based Fin. Instruments Antitrust Litig., 2015 WL 6243526, at *150 (S.D.N.Y. Oct. 20, 
2015) (distinguishing between plaintiffs’ “securities claims” and “antitrust” claims).  I therefore 
find that the term “securities class action lawsuit” does not extend to the antitrust claims at issue 
here.                                                                     
Judge Hellerstein recently reached precisely the same conclusion after analyzing the 
same passage in the same APA.  See Fund Liquidation Holdings LLC v. Citibank, N.A. (“SIBOR 
II”), No. 16 Civ. 5263 (AKH), 2019 WL 3388172 (S.D.N.Y. July 26, 2019).10  In SIBOR, 


10 Judge Hellerstein originally announced this decision orally, during a May 2, 2019 conference.  See SIBOR, No. 
16-cv-5263, ECF No. 389 (“SIBOR II Tr.”).                                 
another FrontPoint entity, FrontPoint Asia, alleged that a number of financial institutions 
(including UBS AG) conspired to manipulate two other interest rate benchmarks—the Singapore 
Interbank Offered Rate (“SIBOR”) and the Singapore Swap Offer Rate—in violation of the 
Sherman Act, among other statutes.  See FrontPoint Asian Event Driven Fund, L.P. v. Citibank, 
N.A. (“SIBOR I”), No. 16 Civ. 5263 (AKH), 2018 WL 4830087, at *1 (S.D.N.Y. Oct. 4, 2018).11  

Judge Hellerstein concluded that the APA’s assignment of claims from the FrontPoint 
entities to FLH did not extend to FrontPoint Asia’s Sherman Act claims.  In his oral decision, 
Judge Hellerstein explained that “[a] securities claim . . . is defined by the Securities Exchange 
Act and the Securities Act or any state provision that is comparable.  That has to do with issues 
of fair representation, it does not have to do with antitrust. . . .  And the claim [in SIBOR] is that 
the market for these products ha[s] been manipulated, and as manipulated claims, we have not a 
securities-related claim but an antitrust claim.”  (SIBOR II Tr. at 13:7-15.)  Judge Hellerstein 
therefore “h[e]ld with the defendants and grant[ed] their motions that the [antitrust claims] 
[we]re not covered” by the APA’s assignment clause.  (Id. at 17:17-19.)   

FrontPoint cites to the APA’s definition of the term “Securities”—i.e., “any debt and/or 
equity securities of any kind, type or nature, including, without limitation, stocks, bonds, options, 
puts, calls, swaps and similar instruments or rights,” (APA Art. II)—to argue for a broader 
reading of the term “securities class action lawsuit,” (FrontPoint Br. 4–5).  This argument is 
unavailing.  Indeed, Judge Hellerstein rejected the same argument in SIBOR II, explaining that 


11 In an October 4, 2018 opinion granting in part and denying in part defendants’ motion to dismiss plaintiffs’ 
Second Amended Complaint, Judge Hellerstein granted FrontPoint Asia leave to amend the complaint to substitute 
FLH as the sole plaintiff in the action.  See SIBOR I, 2018 WL 4830087, at *11.  However, after FLH filed a Third 
Amended Complaint, defendants moved to dismiss FLH’s claims, in part because—according to defendants—the 
APA did not assign FrontPoint Asia’s Sherman Act claims to FLH.  See SIBOR, No. 16-cv-5263, ECF No. 319, at 
11–20.  Judge Hellerstein has since agreed and recently dismissed the action in its entirety.  See SIBOR II, 2019 WL 
3388172, at *4–5.                                                         
“the wide scope of securities and securities-adjacent instruments nowhere suggests that 
‘securities class action lawsuit’ should also encompass antitrust claims.”  SIBOR II, 2019 WL 
3388172, at *5; see also SIBOR II Tr. at 17:14-16 (explaining that the fact that an “antitrust 
wrong [might] affect[] securities, namely derivative contracts, does not make the claim a 

securities claim or a securities-related claim”).  Moreover, in the APA’s definition of “Future 
Claims”—the key term at issue here—the word “securities” is not capitalized, either in reference 
to “securities class action lawsuit[s]” or “non-securities related claim[s].”  (APA Art. II.)  The 
APA’s extensive use of defined terms demonstrates that its drafters were perfectly capable of 
using such terms when they wished to do so.  Their decision not to capitalize the “s” in 
“securities class action” or to specifically define “securities class action lawsuit” should not be 
ignored and the term should therefore be accorded its ordinary meaning, which does not 
encompass antitrust claims.  See SIBOR II, 2019 WL 3388172, at *5 (“While the broadly 
delimited term ‘Securities’ is explicitly defined by the APA, the lowercase-s ‘securities class 
action’ and ‘non-securities related claim’ used to define Future Claims are not, making ‘security’ 

suitable for interpretation in light of common understanding.”); cf. Sunbelt Rentals, Inc. v. 
Charter Oaks Fire Ins. Co., 839 F. Supp. 2d 680, 688–89 (S.D.N.Y. 2012) (faulting party’s 
failure “to draw a distinction between the use of the term ‘equipment’ generically and its use as a 
(capitalized) defined term in the [contract’s] terms and conditions”).    
I also find that the APA did not assign FrontPoint’s unjust enrichment claim to FLH.  A 
claim for unjust enrichment is a “common-law claim[],” see, e.g., Greene v. Gerber Prods. Co., 
262 F. Supp. 3d 38, 46 (E.D.N.Y. 2017), and FrontPoint’s New York unjust enrichment claim, 
(see 12/21/2018 O&O, at 52), falls squarely within the realm of “state . . . common law 
claim[s],” which are expressly excluded from the APA’s definition of “Future Claims,” (APA 
Art. II). Indeed, by failing to include a single reference to its unjust enrichment claim in either its 
opening brief or its reply, FrontPoint appears to concede that the APA did not assign 
FrontPoint’s unjust enrichment claim to FLH.  (See generally FrontPoint Br.; FrontPoint Reply.)   
Because I find the APA’s language unambiguous, I decline to consider the supporting 

declarations that FrontPoint has submitted to establish the parties’ intent in drafting the 
agreement.  See Consarc Corp. v. Marine Midland Bank, N.A., 996 F.2d 568, 573 (2d Cir. 1993) 
(“If a contract is unambiguous, courts are required to give effect to the contract as written and 
may not consider extrinsic evidence to alter or interpret its meaning.”); see also SIBOR II, 2019 
WL 3388172, at *5 (concluding that it would be “unnecessary and inappropriate” to consider the 
declaration of FrontPoint Asia’s former general counsel where “the terms of the APA [were] 
unambiguous on their face”).                                              
Finally, I find that FrontPoint cannot invoke the APA’s Power of Attorney clause as the 
source of FLH’s asserted right to bring the instant claims.  The APA designates and appoints 
FLH “as [FrontPoint’s] attorney-in-fact, . . . with the right, power, and authority to take [a wide 

range of] actions on behalf of [FrontPoint], in [FrontPoint’s] name, place and stead, with respect 
to any of the Claims . . . .  The foregoing power of attorney is coupled with an interest and may 
not be terminated or revoked by [FrontPoint] at any time.”  (APA § 5.3.)  As an initial matter, it 
is well established that “[t]he grant of a power of attorney . . . is not the equivalent of an 
assignment of ownership; and, standing alone, a power of attorney does not enable the grantee to 
bring suit in his own name.”  Advanced Magnetics, 106 F.3d at 17–18.  Moreover, a power of 
attorney “generally terminates when the grantor ceases to exist.”  BBSW, 342 F. Supp. 3d at 413 
(citing Hunt v. Rousmanier’s Adm’rs, 21 U.S. (8 Wheat.) 174, 202 (1823) (“We think it well 
settled, that a power of attorney, though irrevocable during the life of the party, becomes extinct 
by his death.”)).  The Supreme Court established long ago that a power of attorney survives the 
death of the grantor only where that power is “coupled with an ‘interest,’ [in which case] it 
survives the person giving it, and may be executed after his death.”  Hunt, 21 U.S. at 203.  That 
interest “must be an interest in the thing itself,” id. at 204, which in this case would be “the 

assignment of the claims asserted in the litigation,” BBSW, 342 F. Supp. 3d at 414 (interpreting 
the same provision of the APA in decision denying request by other FrontPoint entities to 
substitute FLH as the real party in interest pursuant to Rule 17(a)(3)).  Thus, because I have 
determined that FLH was not assigned the claims asserted in this litigation—and that FLH lacks 
an interest “in the thing itself”—I find that the power of attorney terminated when FrontPoint 
ceased operations in 2012 and it therefore cannot be the source of FLH’s right to assert the 
claims at issue in this litigation.                                       
Because I have concluded that FrontPoint did not assign the claims at issue in this 
litigation to FLH and that FLH therefore may not be substituted pursuant to Rule 17(a)(3), I need 
not and decline to consider UBS’s remaining arguments as to why substitution would be 
improper.12                                                               



12 I note that in another benchmark rate manipulation case (addressing the Bank Bill Swap Reference Rate), Judge 
Kaplan recently addressed the same question presented here—i.e., whether FLH could be substituted in place of a 
group of FrontPoint entities on the basis of the APA’s assignment of claims to FLH—and denied the substitution 
request on the ground that substitution would require plaintiffs to add allegations to the complaint relating to the 
assignment, which would exceed the scope of changes permitted under Rule 17.  BBSW, 342 F. Supp. 3d at 416–17 
(S.D.N.Y. 2018).  (In BBSW, Judge Kaplan expressly declined to reach the question of whether the FrontPoint 
entities’ assignment of claims to FLH was adequate, and instead concluded “for other reasons that Rule 17 
substitution [wa]s not available to plaintiffs.”  Id. at 415.)  Judge Kaplan explained that substitution pursuant to Rule 
17(a) is appropriate only where “the change is merely formal and in no way alters the original complaint’s factual 
allegations as to the events or the participants.”  Id. at 416 (quoting Advanced Magnetics, 106 F.3d at 20).  He then 
concluded that “were FLH to join the lawsuit, the amended complaint would ‘necessarily reflect’ the contents of the 
relevant assignments in order to establish FLH’s standing,” and that such an amendment exceeded the standard 
established by the Second Circuit.  Id. at 417 (quoting Cortlandt, 790 F.3d at 424); see also Cortlandt, 790 F.3d at 
424 (concluding that “pleading the existence of a new . . . assignment would require more than a merely formal 
alteration of the complaint” and affirming the district court’s denial of plaintiff’s request to substitute pursuant to 
Rule 17 (internal quotation marks omitted)).                              
     B.   Dismissal for Lack of Capacity to Sue                      
Having determined that FLH may not be substituted as a plaintiff in this action, I turn to 
the issue of whether FrontPoint may continue to litigate this action in its own name.  I find that 
FrontPoint lacks capacity to maintain this lawsuit and therefore grant UBS’s request to dismiss 

the action in its entirety.                                               
          1.  Applicable Law                                         
“Capacity refers to a party’s personal right to litigate in federal court.”  Wiwa v. Royal 
Dutch Petroleum Co., No. 96 Civ. 8386(KMW)(HBP), 2009 WL 464946, at *8 n.30 (S.D.N.Y. 
Feb. 25, 2009) (internal quotation marks omitted).  “Capacity to sue is a threshold matter allied 
with, but conceptually distinct from, the question of standing.”  LBBW Luxemburg S.A. v. Wells 
Fargo Sec., LLC, 744 F. App’x 710, 714 n.3 (2d Cir. 2018) (summary order) (quoting 59 Am. 
Jur. 2d Parties § 26).  Capacity, unlike standing, is “ordinarily not a jurisdictional issue.”  Id. 
(internal quotation marks omitted).  However, “[a] party must maintain its capacity to sue 
throughout litigation,” and lack of capacity is grounds for dismissal.  New Asia Enters. Ltd. v. 

Fabrique, Ltd., No. 13 Civ. 5271 (JFK), 2017 WL 384687, at *1 (S.D.N.Y. Jan. 26, 2017); cf. 
Manhattan Review LLC v. Yun, 765 F. App’x 574, 577 (2d Cir. 2019) (summary order) 
(affirming district court’s determination that lawsuit “should not have been brought in the first 
place because the plaintiffs lacked the capacity to sue”).                
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 17(b) provides that a corporation’s capacity to sue is 
determined “by the law under which it was organized,” while “for all other parties,” capacity is 
determined “by the law of the state where the court is located.”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 17(b)(2)–(3); see 
also BBSW, 342 F. Supp. 3d at 409.  Under New York law, a “partnership formed under the laws 
of any jurisdiction . . . other than the laws of this state and having as partners one or more 
general partners and one or more limited partners” is deemed a “foreign limited partnership.”  
N.Y. P’ship Law § 121-101(e) (McKinney 2018); see also Prickett v. N.Y. Life Ins. Co., 896 F. 
Supp. 2d 236, 248 (S.D.N.Y. 2012) (treating Delaware limited partnership as “foreign limited 
partnership” under New York’s Partnership Law).  “[A] foreign limited partnership’s capacity to 

sue is determined by reference to the laws of the jurisdiction under which [that] limited 
partnership is organized.”  BBSW, 342 F. Supp. 3d at 410 & n.15 (citing N.Y. P’ship Law § 121-
901 (McKinney 2018)).  A limited partnership organized under Delaware law loses its right to 
sue when the partnership files a certificate of cancellation.  See Del. Code Ann. tit. 6, § 17-
803(b) (2017) (“Upon dissolution of a limited partnership and until the filing of a certificate of 
cancellation as provided in § 17-203 of this title, the persons winding up the limited partnership’s 
affairs may, in the name of, and for and on behalf of, the limited partnership, prosecute and 
defend suits, whether civil, criminal or administrative . . . .”); see also United States v. Ovid, No. 
09-cr-216 (JG) (ALC), 2012 WL 2087084, at *4 n.2 (E.D.N.Y. June 8, 2012) (stating that for 
Delaware limited partnerships, “the right to bring suits on behalf of the partnership ends after the 

filing of a certificate of cancellation” (internal quotation marks omitted)).  
          2.  Application                                            
As an initial matter, I note that FrontPoint appears to acknowledge that it has no interest 
in this litigation and therefore lacks standing to sue.  (See FrontPoint Reply 1 (“FLH is and 
always has been the real party in interest in this case.”); see also BBSW, 342 F. Supp. 3d at 409 
(“Assuming arguendo that . . . the FrontPoint Plaintiffs completely assigned the claims brought 
in this case to FLH, they do not have standing to sue because they no longer have an interest in 
the litigation.” (citing Aaron Ferer & Sons Ltd. v. Chase Manhattan Bank, Nat’l Ass’n, 731 F.2d 
112, 125 (2d Cir. 1984) (“An unequivocal and complete assignment extinguishes the assignor’s 
rights against the obligor and leaves the assignor without standing to sue the obligor.”))).)  
However, FrontPoint’s concession that it lacks standing is rooted in its assertion that it fully 
assigned its interest in the claims at issue to FLH before the lawsuit was filed and—as detailed 
above—I have found that assignment to be inadequate.  See supra Part II.A.   

UBS insists that “FrontPoint lacks standing regardless of whether its purported 
assignment to FLH was effective,” on the ground that “[i]t is FrontPoint’s burden to establish 
standing” and FrontPoint has made no attempt to do so.  (UBS Opp’n 7.)13  UBS relies on 
language from the Second Circuit’s summary order in Valdin Investments Corp. v. Oxbridge 
Capital Management, LLC, in which the court determined it “need not question” plaintiff’s 
assertions relating to the effectiveness of an assignment “insofar as [the assertions] 
demonstrate[d] the absence of standing” because the plaintiff, “as the party invoking federal 
jurisdiction, bears the burden of establishing standing.”  651 F. App’x 5, 7 n.3 (2d Cir. 2016).  
However, like Judge Kaplan in BBSW, I decline to reach UBS’s argument that “the mere 
assertion by [FrontPoint] that [it] assigned [its] claims to FLH deprives [FrontPoint] of 

standing.”  342 F. Supp. 3d at 409.  I need not reach this question because, even assuming 
FrontPoint had standing to sue, “[it] would still lack capacity to sue by virtue of having 
dissolved.”  Id.14                                                        

13 “UBS Opp’n” refers to UBS AG’s Memorandum of Law in Opposition to Plaintiff’s Motion for Substitution, filed 
March 5, 2019.  (Doc. 218.)                                               
14 Capacity to sue is a “defense [that] may be waived if it is not raised in a party’s initial responsive pleading to a 
claim.”  BBSW, 342 F. Supp. 3d at 411.  Although FrontPoint has not expressly argued that UBS’s lack of capacity 
defense is waived, FrontPoint contends that “[t]he liquidation of the FrontPoint funds was publicly reported in the 
news” and was “no secret.”  (FrontPoint Reply 7.)  Any argument implying that UBS has waived its right to 
challenge FrontPoint’s capacity to sue is wholly without merit.  UBS has not yet filed an answer to the CAC and, in 
any event, I find that UBS raised the capacity to sue defense “at the first pragmatically possible time.”  Animazing 
Entm’t, Inc. v. Louis Lofredo Assocs., Inc., 88 F. Supp. 2d 265, 268 (S.D.N.Y. 2000) (finding waiver improper 
where affirmative defense was raised as soon as pragmatically possible).  UBS has argued that FrontPoint lacks 
capacity to sue since FrontPoint’s dissolution first came to UBS’s attention in late 2017.  (See Doc. 172, at 1, 3 
(November 9, 2017 letter explaining that Defendants had learned via a recent court filing in another action that 
“FrontPoint ceased to be a Delaware limited partnership effective March 7, 2012” and that therefore “[t]he claims 
 There is no dispute that FrontPoint was dissolved long before this lawsuit was filed. 
FrontPoint filed its Certificate of Cancellation of Certificate of Limited Partnership with the 
Delaware Secretary of State on March 9, 2012.  (See Bell Decl. Ex. 2.)  Thus, under Delaware 
law, FrontPoint’s right to bring lawsuits terminated on that date.  See Del. Code Ann. tit. 6, § 17- 
803(b); Ovid, 2012 WL 2087084, at *4 n.2.  Because it is undisputed that FrontPoint lacked 
capacity to sue when the instant action was filed on January 21, 2016—and continues to lack 
capacity today—TI grant UBS’s  request that FrontPoint’s claims be dismissed.  See New Asia, 
2017 WL 384687, at *1 (granting defendant’s summary judgment motion where there was “no 
dispute” that plaintiff “lack[ed] capacity to maintain this suit’). 
 iI.    Conclusion 
 For the foregoing reasons, FrontPoint’s motion for substitution is DENIED and, because 
FrontPoint lacks capacity to maintain this lawsuit, its claims are DISMISSED. 
 The Clerk of Court is respectfully directed to terminate the motions pending at Docket 
Entries 196, 198, and 201, and to close the case. 
SO ORDERED. 
Dated: August 16, 2019                       
New York, New York             } f               |

                              Vernon S.  Broderick 
                              United  States District   Judge 

asserted on behalf of . . . FrontPoint must be dismissed . . . because [FrontPoint] lack[s] any legal existence under 
applicable law, and therefore ha[s] no capacity to sue under Rule 17’).) Judge Kaplan reached the same conclusion 
in BBSW  and declined to find waiver despite the fact that the FrontPoint entities’ “dissolutions had been public for 
years,” in part because the original complaint—like the CAC here—falsely “described each plaintiff as currently in 
business at the time of filing.” 342 F. Supp. 3d at 411-12. 

                                    18