IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                        
                FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO                          



Tax-Free  Fixed  Income  Fund  for                                       
Puerto  Rico  Residents,  Inc.,  et                                      
al.,                                                                     

           Plaintiffs,            Civil No. 22-1101(GMM)                 

               v.                                                        

   Ocean Capital LLC, et al.,                                            

           Defendants.                                                   

Ocean Capital LLC,                                                       

     Counterclaim Plaintiff,                                             

               v.                                                        

Puerto  Rico  Residents  Tax-Free                                        
Fund, Inc., Puerto Rico Residents                                        
Tax-Free  Fund  VI,  Inc.  and  Tax-                                     
Free   Fund   for   Puerto   Rico                                        
Residents, Inc.,                                                         

         Affected Funds.                                                 


                          OPINION AND ORDER                              
    Before the Court is the Honorable United States Magistrate           
Judge Giselle Lopez-Soler’s (“the Magistrate Judge”) May 13, 2024,        
Report and Recommendation (“R&R”) and June 14, 2024, Report and           
Recommendation (“Second R&R”). (Docket Nos. 218; 226). In the R&R,        
the  Magistrate  Judge  addressed  motions  related  to  Co-Defendant     
Ocean Capital LLC’s (“Ocean Capital”) Ocean Capital LLC’s Answer          
and Amended Counterclaims to Plaintiffs’ First Amended Complaint          
(“Amended Counterclaim”) against Puerto Rico Residents Tax-Free           
Fund, Inc. (“PRRTFF I”), Puerto Rico Residents Tax-Free Fund VI,          
Inc. (“PRRTFF VI”) and Tax-Free Fund for Puerto Rico Residents            
(“TFF”) (collectively, “Affected Funds”); and Plaintiff Investment        
Funds’1 (collectively, “Plaintiffs”) Plaintiffs’ Memorandum of Law        
in Support of their Motion for Entry of Rule 54(b) Final Judgment         
and Stay Pending Appeal, and in Opposition to Ocean Capital LLC’s         
Motion for Clarification and Amendment of Judgment) (“Motion for          
Final Judgment and Stay”). (Docket Nos. 168; 169; 202). In her            
Second R&R, the Magistrate Judge recommended that the Court find          
moot Plaintiffs’ Motion to Dismiss or, in the alternative, Stay           
Ocean Capital LLC’s Amended Counterclaims (“Motion to Dismiss or          
Stay Counterclaim”) filed at Docket No. 171. (Docket No. 226).            
    For the following reasons, the Court ADOPTS IN PART the R&R          

at Docket No. 218. As such, the Court ENTERS JUDGMENT in favor of         
Ocean Capital on the Amended Counterclaim. (Docket No. 168). The          
Court, however, DENIES Plaintiffs’ Motion for Final Judgment and          
Stay. (Docket No. 202). In accord with these determinations, the          


1 Tax-Free Fixed Income Fund for Puerto Rico Residents, Inc. (“Fund I”), Tax-
Free Fixed Income Fund II for Puerto Rico Residents, Inc. (“Fund II”), Tax-Free 
Fixed Income Fund III for Puerto Rico Residents, Inc. (“Fund III”), Tax-Free 
Fixed Income Fund IV for Puerto Rico Residents, Inc. (“Fund IV”), Tax-Free Fixed 
Income Fund V for Puerto Rico Residents, Inc. (“Fund V”), Puerto Rico Residents 
Tax-Free Fund, Inc. (“PRRTFF I”), Puerto Rico Residents Tax-Free Fund IV, Inc 
(“PRRTFF IV”), Puerto Rico Residents Tax-Free Fund VI, Inc. (“PRRTFF VI”) and 
Tax-Free Fund for Puerto Rico Residents (“TFF”). (Collectively, “Plaintiffs”) 
Court  finds  MOOT  Ocean  Capital  LLC’s  Motion  for  Statutory         
Injunction  under  14  L.P.R.A.  §  3655  and  Request  for  Hearing      
(“Motion for Statutory Injunction”) (Docket No. 169); finds MOOT          
Ocean  Capital  LLC’s  Motion  for  Expedited  Hearing  or  Expedited     
Treatment  of  Counterclaims  and  Related  Motions  (Referred  to        
Magistrate Judge López-Soler per Court Order dated October 26,            
2023) (“Motion for Expedited Treatment”) (Docket No. 206); and            
finds MOOT Ocean Capital LLC and Affiliated Defendants’ Motion for        
Leave to File Reply in Support of Objections (Docket No. 223). The        
Court also ADOPTS in FULL the Second R&R and finds MOOT Plaintiffs’       
Motion to Dismiss or Stay Counterclaim (Docket No. 171).                  
                           I. BACKGROUND                                 
    On February 28, 2022, Plaintiffs, nine close-end investment          
funds  (“Plaintiffs”),  brought  the  instant  action   asserting         
violations of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (“Exchange Act”)        

against Defendants.2 (Docket No. 1) (“Complaint”). On January 5,          
2023, Plaintiffs filed the First Amended Complaint for Violations         
of the Federal Securities Laws (“Amended Complaint”). They allege         
that Defendants violated Sections 13(d), 14(a), and 20(a) of the          


2  Ocean  Capital  LLC,  William  Heath  Hawk,  José  R.  Izquierdo  II,  Brent  D. 
Rosenthal, Roxana Cruz-Rivera, Ethan Danial, Mojdeh L. Khagan, PRCE Management 
LLC  (“PRCE”),  Benjamin  T.  Eiler,  Vasileios  A.  Sfyris,  Francisco  González, 
Gustavo Nevárez Torres, Alejandro Acosta Rivera, Honne II, LP, Meir Hurwitz, 
Mario J. Montalvo, José M. Pérez-Gutiérrez, RAD Investments, LLC, 2 Sanzam 
Investments LLC, Juan E. Soto Alvarado, Sandra Calderón, The Estate of José 
Hidalgo, and Avraham Zeines (collectively, “Defendants”).                 
Exchange  Act  and  applicable  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission     
regulations. (Docket No. 111).                                            
    On January 1, 2023, PRCE Management LLC (“PRCE”), William            
Heath  Hawk,  Benjamin  T.  Eiler,  Vasileios  A.  Sfyris,  José  R.      
Izquierdo  II,  Brent  D.  Rosenthal,  Roxana  Cruz-Rivera,  Ethan        
Danial,  and   Mojdeh  L.   Khaghan  (collectively,   “Affiliated         
Defendants”) and Ocean Capital, filed their respective motions to         
dismiss. (Docket Nos. 122; 123). As relevant here, the Magistrate         
Judge evaluated these motions and recommended that disclosures of         
Exchange  Act  Section  13(d)  allegations  are  sufficient  to  moot     
Section 13(d) causes of action. (Docket No. 187 at 14). The Court         
adopted the Magistrate Judge’s recommendation and dismissed the           
Amended  Complaint  on  September  8,  2023.  (Docket  No.  195).  On     
September  13,  2023,  the  Court  entered  a  Partial   Judgment         
“DISMISSING Plaintiffs’ claims at Docket No. 111.” (Docket No.            

200).                                                                     
    On April 4, 2023, Ocean Capital filed the Amended Counterclaim       
against Affected Funds. (Docket No. 168). Therein, Ocean Capital          
asked the Court to enter a declaratory judgment validating the            
election of individuals nominated by Ocean Capital, namely José R.        
Izquierdo II (“Izquierdo”), Brent D. Rosenthal (“Rosenthal”), and         
Ethan Danial (“Danial”) (collectively “Ocean Capital Nominees”),          
to  one  or  more  of  the  Affected  Funds’  respective  boards  of      
directors.3 (Id. at 60-62). Additionally, Ocean Capital asked the         
Court to enter a statutory injunction pursuant to Article 7.15 of         
the  Puerto  Rico  General  Corporations  Law,  14  L.P.R.A.  §  3655     
(“Section  3655”).  It  required  the  Affected  Funds  to  seat  the     
elected  Ocean  Capital  Nominees  to  their  respective  boards  of      
directors. (Id.). This request was reiterated in Ocean Capital’s          
April 14, 2023 Motion for Statutory Injunction, which the Court           
referred to the Magistrate Judge on April 17, 2023. (Docket Nos.          
169; 170).                                                                
    The  Affected  Funds  filed  their  Motion  to  Dismiss  or  Stay    
Counterclaim  on  April  18,  2023.  They  argue  that  the  Amended      
Counterclaim is unripe, given that to obtain the sought relief,           
Ocean Capital would need to demonstrate that the election of the          
Ocean Capital Nominees to the Affected Funds’ boards was done in          
accord with federal securities law. See (Docket No. 171 at 6). As         

such, Plaintiffs asked the Court to dismiss without prejudice or,         
in  the  alternative,  stay  the  Amended  Counterclaim   pending         
resolution of Plaintiffs’ federal securities claims in the Amended        
Complaint. See (id. at 7).                                                
    On September 22, 2023, Plaintiffs filed their Motion for Final       
Judgment and Stay. (Docket No. 202). They request that the Court          

3 Specifically, Ocean Capital asked the Court to enter declaratory judgments 
validating the election of (1) Izquierdo and Rosenthal to PRRTFF I’s Board of 
Directors; (2) Izquierdo and Rosenthal to PRRTFF IV’s Board of Directors; and 
(3) Danial, Izquierdo, and Rosenthal to TFF I’s Board of Directors. (Docket No. 
168 at 60-62).                                                            
either:  (1)  enter  a  Rule  54(b)  final  judgment  on  the  Court’s    
dismissal  of  Plaintiffs’  federal  securities  claims  and  stay        
further proceedings pending Plaintiffs’ appeal of that judgment;          
or  (2)  enter  a  judgment  on  the  Amended  Counterclaim  in  Ocean    
Capital’s favor and then stay the effect of that judgment pending         
Plaintiffs’ appeal. See (id. at 7).                                       
    On  October  6,  2023,  Co-Defendants  Ocean  Capital  and  the      
Affiliated  Defendants  filed  Ocean  Capital  LLC’s  and  Affiliated     
Defendants’ Opposition to Plaintiffs’ Motion for Entry of Rule            
54(b) Final Judgment and Stay Pending Appeal (“Opposition to Motion       
for Final Judgment and Stay”). (Docket No. 203). Ocean Capital and        
the Affiliated Defendants asked the Court to: (1) enter judgment          
in their favor on the Amended Counterclaim in accordance with the         
alternative request made by Plaintiffs in their Motion for Final          
Judgment  and  Stay;  and  (2)  decline  to  grant  Plaintiffs  their     

requested stay. (Id.). On October 26, 2023, the Court referred the        
Counterclaim and the Motion to Dismiss or Stay Counterclaim and           
related  motions  to  the  Magistrate  Judge.  (Docket  No.  205).  On    
October 30, 2023, Ocean Capital filed its Motion for Expedited            
Treatment. (Docket No. 206).                                              
    On November 1, 2023, Plaintiffs filed Plaintiffs’ Reply in           
Further Support of their Motion for Entry of Rule 54(b) Final             
Judgment  and  Stay  Pending  Appeal  (“Reply  to  Motion  for  Final     
Judgment and Stay”). (Docket No. 208). There, they reiterate their        
assent to the Court’s entering of an order in Ocean Capital’s favor       
on the Amended Counterclaim. (Id.). Plaintiffs also stress that a         
stay of the case pending appeal is critical, given the risk that          
Ocean Capital Nominees, who were allegedly improperly elected to          
the Affected Funds’ boards of directors, could, if allowed to be          
seated  in  accord  with  the  Amended  Counterclaim,  take  actions      
affecting  Plaintiffs’  interests  that  would  be  challenging  to       
reverse. (Id.).                                                           
    On November 3, 2023, Plaintiffs filed Plaintiffs’ Response to        
Ocean  Capital  LLC’s  Motion  for  Expedited  Hearing  or  Expedited     
Treatment  of  Counterclaims  (“Response  to  Motion  for  Expedited      
Treatment”).  (Docket  No.  209).  Plaintiffs  concur  with  Ocean        
Capital’s  request  that  the  Amended  Counterclaim  be  “resolved       
expeditiously” and recommend that the Court grant their Motion for        
Final  Judgment  and  Stay  at  Docket  No.  202.  (Id.).  Plaintiffs     

provided a proposed order to that effect. (Docket No. 209-1).             
    On May 13, 2024, the Magistrate Judge issued the R&R. (Docket        
No. 218). The Magistrate Judge held that “[b]ecause both Plaintiffs       
and  Ocean  Capital  and  the  Affiliated  Defendants  consent  for       
Judgment to be entered granting Ocean Capital’s counterclaims at          
Docket No. 168 (see Docket No. 208), the only remaining portion of        
Plaintiffs’ motion is whether the Court should stay the effect of         
the  Judgment  pending  appeal  of  the  dismissal  of  Plaintiffs’       
securities  claims.”  (Id.  at  3).  The  Magistrate  Judge  then         
recommended  that  the  Court  grant  Plaintiffs’  Motion  for  Final     
Judgment and Stay at Docket No. 202 and issue a judgment on Ocean         
Capital’s  Amended   Counterclaim  consistent  with   Plaintiffs’         
proposed order at Docket No. 209-1. (Id.).                                
    On May 24, 2024, Ocean Capital and the Affiliated Defendants         
filed Ocean Capital LLC and Affiliated Defendants’ Objections to          
Report  and  Recommendation  (“Objection”).  (Docket  No.   221).         
Therein, Ocean Capital and the Affiliated Defendants state that           
the Magistrate Judge was correct in recommending the entry of a           
statutory injunction and a final judgment in its favor on the             
Amended Counterclaim. (Id. at 7). However, the Objection argues           
that the Magistrate Judge erred in recommending that the Court            
grant a stay, given that Plaintiffs failed to demonstrate that            
they would be likely to succeed on the merits on appeal. (Id.).           
Moreover, the Objection contends that a stay would undermine the          

Courts  entering  of  a  judgment  on  the  Amended  Counterclaim,  by    
denying Ocean Capital and other shareholders of any remedy pending        
potentially  lengthy  appeal  proceedings.  (Id.).  As  such,  Ocean      
Capital and the Affiliated Defendants ask this Court to reject the        
stay and enter judgment in Ocean Capital’s favor on all claims and        
counterclaims. (Id.). Alternatively, if the Court feels inclined          
to  adopt  the  Magistrate  Judge’s  R&R  at  Docket  No.  218,  Ocean    
Capital  and  the  Affiliated  Defendants  ask  the  Court  to  either    
celebrate an oral argument on its objections or “[a]t an absolute         
minimum. . .narrowly tailor a stay to a short time - Ocean Capital        
suggests 60 days - within which the Funds should request a stay           
from the First Circuit.” (Id. at 8).                                      
    On June 7, 2024, Plaintiffs filed Plaintiffs’ Response to            
Defendants’  Objections  to  Report  and  Recommendation  (“Reply  to     
Objection”). (Docket No. 222). On June 10, 2024, Ocean Capital LLC        
and  Affiliated  Defendants’  Motion  for  Leave  to  File  Reply  in     
Support  of  Objections  was  filed.  (Docket  No.  223).  Plaintiffs     
responded  on  June  11,  2024  with  Plaintiffs’  Response  to  Ocean    
Capital LLC and Affiliated Defendants’ Motion for Leave to File           
Reply in Support of Objections. (Docket No. 224). On June 14, 2024,       
Ocean Capital LLC and Affiliated Defendants’ Motion for Leave to          
Submit Supplemental Authority was filed and granted by the Court.         
(Docket Nos. 225; 227). Also on June 14, 2024, Ocean Capital LLC          
and Affiliated Defendants’ Notice of Supplemental Authority was           

filed, informing the Court that the United States Supreme Court’s         
recent decision in Starbucks Corp. v. McKinney supported their            
position in the Objection. (Docket No. 228).                              
    On June 14, 2024, the Magistrate Judge filed the Second R&R          
recommending that the Court deem moot the Motion to Dismiss or            
Stay Counterclaim. (Docket No. 226). No timely objection was filed.       
                        II.  LEGAL STANDARD                              

    “In ruling on a motion for a stay pending appeal, we consider        
(1) [w]hether the stay applicant has made a strong showing that it        
is likely to succeed on the merits, (2) whether the applicant will        
be irreparably injured absent a stay, (3) whether [the] issuance          
of the stay will substantially injure the other parties interested        
in the proceeding, and (4) where the public interest lies.” Dist.         
4 Lodge of the Intl Assn of Machinists & Aerospace Workers Loc.           
Lodge 207 v. Raimondo, 18 F.4th 38, 42 (1st Cir. 2021) (internal          
citations and quotations omitted); see also Nken v. Holder, 556           
U.S. 418, 426 (2009); Hilton v. Braunskill, 481 U.S. 770, 776             
(1987); Bos. Parent Coal. for Acad. Excellence Corp. v. Sch. Comm.        
of City of Bos., 996 F.3d 37, 44 (1st Cir. 2021); Common Cause            
R.I.  v.  Gorbea,  970  F.3d  11,  14  (1st  Cir.  2020);  In  re  Fin.   
Oversight & Mgmt. Bd. for Puerto Rico, 588 F.Supp.3d 191, 200             
(D.P.R. 2022).                                                            
    “The first two factors ‘are the most critical.’” Common Cause        
R.I., 970 F.3d at 14 (quoting Nken, 556 U.S. at 426). “It is not          

enough that the chance of success on the merits be ‘better than           
negligible.’.  .  .By   the  same  token,  simply  showing   some         
‘possibility  of  irreparable  injury,’.  .  .fails  to  satisfy  the     
second factor.” In re Fin. Oversight & Mgmt. Bd. for Puerto Rico,         
588 F. Supp. 3d 191, 200 (D.P.R. 2022) (quoting Nken, 556 U.S. at         
434-35). But “‘[t]he sine qua non [of the applicable standard] is         
whether  the  [movants]  are  likely  to  succeed  on  the  merits.’”     
Acevedo–García v. Vera–Monroig, 296 F.3d 13, 16 (1st Cir. 2002)           
(quoting Weaver v. Henderson, 984 F.2d 11, 12 (1st Cir. 1993));           
see also In re Fin. Oversight & Mgmt. Bd. for Puerto Rico, 588            
F.Supp.3d at 200.                                                         
    Ultimately, the grant of a stay is a decision left to judicial       
discretion  and  “[t]he  traditional  stay  factors   contemplate         
individualized judgments in each case.” Hilton, 481 U.S. at 777.          
“The party requesting a stay bears the burden of showing that the         
circumstances justify an exercise of that discretion.” Nken, 556          
U.S. at 433-34.                                                           
                        III.  DISCUSSION                                 
A.   Standard of Review of the Magistrate Judge’s R&R                     
    A  federal  district  court  may  refer  civil  actions  or          
proceedings to a magistrate judge for a report and recommendation.        
See 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B); Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b); Local Civ. R.        
72. Adversely impacted parties may “serve and file specific written       
objections to the proposed findings and recommendations” within           

fourteen  days  of  receipt  of  a  magistrate  judge’s  report  and      
recommendation. 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(C). “Absent objection,. .           
.[a] district court ha[s] a right to assume that [the affected            
party]  agree[s]  to  the  magistrate's  recommendation.”  Barreto-       
Rivera  v.  United  States,  887  F.Supp.2d  347,  351  (D.P.R.  2012)    
(quoting Templeman v. Chris Craft Corp., 770 F.2d 245, 247 (1st           
Cir.1985)).  “Failure  to  raise  objections  to  the  Report  and        
Recommendation waives that party's right to review in the district        
court  and  those  claims  not  preserved  by  such  objections  are      
precluded upon appeal.” Davet v. Maccarone, 973 F.2d 22, 30–31            
(1st Cir. 1992). Here, Ocean Capital and the Affiliated Defendants        
timely filed their Objection to the R&R on May 24, 2024. (Docket          
No. 221). However, no objections were filed against the Second            
R&R.                                                                      
    Upon receipt of a timely objection, a Court reviews de novo          
the  proposed  findings  or  recommendations  to  which  specific         
objections  were  made.  See  Bonefont–Igaravidez  v.  International      
Shipping  Corp.,  659  F.3d  120  (1st  Cir.2011);  United  States  v.    
Valencia-Copete,  792  F.2d  4  (1st  Cir.  1986);  Hall  v.  Centro      
Cardiovascular de Puerto Rico y del Caribe, 899 F.Supp.2d 106, 109        
(D.P.R. 2012); United States v. De La Cruz-Arias, 444 F.Supp.3d           
315, 316 (D.P.R. 2020)(quoting Ramos-Echevarría v. Pichis, Inc.,          
698 F.Supp.2d. 262, 264 (D.P.R. 2010))(“A party that files a timely       
objection is entitled to a de novo determination of those portions        

of the report or specified proposed findings or recommendations to        
which specific objection is made.” (internal quotations omitted)).        
In reviewing a magistrate judge’s recommendations, a Court may            
“accept, reject, or modify, in whole or in part, the findings or          
recommendations  made  by  the  magistrate  judge.”  28  U.S.C.  §        
636(a)(b)(1)(C);   see   also    Álamo   Rodríguez   v.    Pfizer         
Pharmaceuticals,  Inc.,  286  F.Supp.2d  144,  146  (D.P.R.  2003).       
Moreover, a Court may accept any portion of a magistrate judge’s          
report and recommendation on which no objections were raised. See         
Hernández-Mejías  v.  General  Elec.,  428  F.Supp.2d  4,  6  (D.P.R.     
2005).                                                                    
B.   This Court’s review of the Magistrate Judge’s R&R and the            
    Second R&R                                                           

    First, given that no timely objection was filed in response          
to the Second R&R, the Court ADOPTS as unopposed the Magistrate           
Judge’s  determination  that  the  Motion  to  Dismiss  or   Stay         
Counterclaim is MOOT. See (Docket Nos. 171; 226); see also Padilla-       
Gomez v. Comm'r of Soc. Sec., 88 F.Supp.3d 14, 17 (D.P.R. 2015)           
(quoting Santiago v. Canon U.S.A., Inc., 138 F.3d 1, 4 (1st Cir.          
1998)) (“a party's failure to assert a specific objection to a            
report and recommendation irretrievably waives any right to review        
by the district court and the court of appeals.”).                        
    As to the R&R, after completing its independent review of the        
record,  the  R&R;  Ocean  Capital  and  the  Affiliated  Defendants’     
objections to the R&R; and Plaintiffs’ Reply to Objection, the            
Court, as outlined below, ADOPTS IN PART the Magistrate Judge’s           
determinations in the R&R. As an initial matter, Parties and the          
Magistrate Judge agree that a judgment should be entered granting         
Ocean Capital’s Amended Counterclaim at Docket No. 168. See e.g.          
(Docket Nos. 202; 208; 209; 218; 221). Thus, finding no objection         
to this portion of the Magistrate Judge’s R&R, the Court enters a         
judgment in favor of Ocean Capital on its Amended Counterclaim,           
rendering: (1) declaratory judgments validating the election of           
certain Ocean Capital nominees to the Affected Funds’ boards of           
directors; and (2) statutory injunctions directing Affected Funds         
to seat the Ocean Capital Nominees as duly elected directors. As          
such, the only matter pending de novo review by this Court, is            
whether to adopt the Magistrate Judge’s recommendation to grant           
Plaintiffs’ request for a stay pending appeal.                            
       1.     Likelihood of success or serious legal question            
              on the merits on appeal                                    

    In  Plaintiffs’  Motion  for  Final  Judgment  and  Stay,  they      
contend  that  a  party  seeking  a  stay  pending  appeal  need  not     
persuade the court that a decision is likely to be reversed on the        
merits but rather can justify a stay by raising a serious legal           
question. (Docket No. 202 at 19). Plaintiffs contend that such a          
significant legal query exists in this case, to wit, whether their        
Section 13(d) claims were mooted by Defendants’ disclosure of the         
Complaint  and  Amended  Complaint  in  Defendants’  proxy  filings.      
(Docket Nos. 202 at 13, 19-20; 187 at 16). Specifically, Plaintiffs       
note that the First Circuit, in General Aircraft Corp. v. Lampert,4       
held that an incomplete and or misleading Schedule 13(d) filing           
without   correction   and   amplification   irreparably   harmed         
stockholders.  (Docket  No.  202  at  20).  Whether  or  not  such        
irreparable harm is cured by subsequent proxy filing disclosures,         
according to Plaintiffs, is a serious legal question that merits          

4 556 F.2d 90 (1st Cir. 1977).                                            
a stay pending appellate resolution. (Id. at 19). Ultimately, the         
Motion for Final Judgment and Stay stresses that failure to grant         
a stay would significantly reduce Plaintiffs’ ability to secure           
meaningful review on appeal. (Id.).                                       
    The Magistrate Judge avers that she is “unconvinced” by the          
merits of Plaintiffs’ arguments but finds that Plaintiff’s claim          
presents a serious legal question that the First Circuit has not          
resolved. (Docket No. 218 at 6). Thus, the Magistrate Judge, citing       
Providence  J.  Co.  v.  Fed.  Bureau  of  Invest.,5  concludes  that     
“[b]earing in mind that a stay is favored when there is a serious         
legal question on appeal, this factor weighs in favor of the stay         
pending appeal.” (Id.).                                                   
    In their Objection, Ocean Capital and Affiliated Defendants,         
highlight that the R&R did not conclude that Plaintiffs were likely       
to succeed on the merits of their arguments on appeal. (Docket No.        

221 at 16). Rather, the Objection argues that the R&R incorrectly         
relied on its identification of a serious legal question to justify       
its finding that this factor weighed in favor of entering a stay.         
(Id. at 9, 16-19).                                                        
    The  Court  finds  Ocean  Capital  and  Affiliated  Defendants’      
argument to be persuasive. The R&R interprets the First Circuit’s         
opinion in Providence J. Co. as holding that “a stay is favored           


5 595 F.2d 889, 890 (1st Cir. 1979).                                      
when serious legal questions are present” on appeal, even when            
appellants have not made a strong showing that they are likely to         
succeed on the merits. (Docket No. 218 at 6). However, the standard       
communicated  in  Providence  J.  Co.  only  stated  that  there  were    
instances in which appellants seeking a stay did not need to show         
that their appeals possessed absolute merit. See Providence J.            
Co., 595 F.2d at 890. Such instances could arise when appellants          
demonstrated that their appeals had “potential merit,” presented          
a  serious  legal  question,  and  “denial  of  a  stay  will  utterly    
destroy the status quo, irreparably harming appellants, but the           
granting of a stay will cause relatively slight harm to appellee.”        
Id.  (citing  Washington  Metropolitan  Area  Transit  Commission  v.     
Holiday Tours, 182 U.S.App.D.C. 220, 559 F.2d 841 (1977)); see            
also Hing  Cheung  Wong v. I.N.S., 980 F.2d 721  (1st  Cir. 1992)         
(citing Cintron-Garcia v. Romero-Barcelo, 671 F.2d 1, 4 n.2 (1st          

Cir. 1982) (an appellant need not show a substantial probability          
of success “in the unusual case. . .where the harm to plaintiffs          
is particularly severe and disproportionate.”).6                          

6 In their Reply to Objection, Plaintiffs reiterated their argument that “[t]o 
demonstrate likelihood of success on appeal. . .the appeal need only ‘raise 
serious and difficult questions of law in an area where the law is somewhat 
unclear.”  (Docket  No.  222  at  14)  (internal  citations  omitted).  Courts  may 
consider the existence of a “serious legal question” in ruling on a motion to 
stay pending appeal. The Court, reading the cases cited by Plaintiffs in the 
Reply to Objection, concludes that such a finding does not absolve a movant 
from demonstrating that their legal argument has merit on appeal and that a 
stay is strongly supported by the other factors under consideration. See Alabama 
Ass’n of Realtors v. Dep’t of Health & Hum. Servs., 594 U.S. 758, 761-62 (2021) 
(finding a movant need not demonstrate a substantial likelihood of success on 
the merits where they: (1) supported a finding of a serious legal question on 
    Moreover,  the  Supreme  Court’s  recent  holding  in  Starbucks     
Corp. v. McKinney reiterated the traditional test for a preliminary       
injunction, which mirrors that for a stay, requires a finding of          
likely success on the merits. See Starbucks Corp. v. McKinney, 144        
S.  Ct.  1570,  1576  (2024).  First,  “the  applicable  standard  for    
evaluating requests for stays. . .is the four-part algorithm used         
for preliminary injunctions.”  Arevalo v. Ashcroft, 344 F.3d 1, 9         
(1st Cir. 2003). In Starbucks Corp., the Supreme Court emphasized         
that “absent clear [statutory] command,” Courts should adhere to          
the “several hundred years of history” in applying the four-factor        
test which requires a finding that a party is “likely to succeed          
on the merits.” Starbucks Corp., 144 S. Ct. at 1576.  Thus, here,         
the Court concludes that a required finding that an appellant is          
likely to win on its appeal’s merits is still essential and is            
only  softened  in  limited  instances  in  which  the  Court  also       

identifies a serious legal question and determines that the harm          
incurred by appellants is unusually severe.                               
    In  the  instant  case,  Ocean  Capital  and  the  Affiliated        
Defendants did not object to the Magistrate Judge’s averment that         

the merits by citing conflicting circuit court rulings on a key legal question; 
and; (2) made a “sufficiently strong showing as to the remaining stay factors”); 
Citigroup Glob. Mkts., Inc. v. VCG Special Opportunities Master Fund Ltd., 598 
F.3d 30, 37 (2d Cir. 2010)(“a ‘serious questions’ showing necessarily requires 
more than that the chances for success [on the merits] are only ‘better than 
negligible’”);  Leiva-Perez  v.  Holder,  640  F.3d  962,  968  (9th  Cir.  2011) 
(“Regardless of how one expresses the requirement, the idea is that in order to 
justify a stay, a petitioner must show, at a minimum, that she has a substantial 
case for relief on the merits.”).                                         
she found the merits of Plaintiffs’ appeal to be unconvincing. As         
such,  the  Court  adopts  as  unopposed  the  Magistrate  Judge’s        
determination that Plaintiffs failed to demonstrate a substantial         
likelihood that they would succeed on appeal. Despite this finding,       
the R&R concluded that a stay was justified given the conclusion          
that Plaintiffs’ appeal had potential merit and raised a serious          
legal  question.  However,   those  findings  alone,  without  a          
determination  that  denying   a  stay  would  cause   Plaintiffs         
substantial harm that greatly outweighs any injury that a stay            
would inflict upon Ocean Capital and the Affiliated Defendants,           
are insufficient to justify a stay pending appeal. Thus, the Court        
next considers the hardships that a grant or denial of a stay would       
pose  to  the  Parties  and  the  public,  to  ascertain  whether  the    
Magistrate  Judge’s  findings  regarding  the  merits  and  legal         
significance of Plaintiffs appeal justify the imposition of a stay.       

       2.     Irreparable Harm                                           

    Plaintiffs  contend  that  “[a]  shareholder’s  right  to  an        
informed vote is fundamental, and it is binding law in the First          
Circuit  that  deprivation  of  that  right  amounts  to  irreparable     
harm.” (Docket No. 202 at 20). As such, according to Plaintiffs,          
allowing  Ocean  Capital  Nominees,  supposedly  elected  based  on       
misleading information, to be seated on Affected Funds’ boards of         
directors,  would  constitute  irreparable  harm.  (Id.).   While         
Plaintiffs concede that “the Counterclaims only seek board seats          
comprising a board minority at each of the [Affected] Funds,” they        
stress that “Ocean Capital has already demanded that. . .PRRTFF I         
seat two additional nominees, on the basis of proxies solicited           
through  materially  false  and  misleading  information.  .  .[and       
through] subsequent elections—currently scheduled for November 2,         
2023.  .  .Ocean  Capital  could  potentially  obtain  a  majority  of    
directors at [PRRTFF VI and TFF I] on the basis of these same             
materially false and misleading proxy statements.” (Id. at 22).           
Critically, Plaintiffs allege that while they await a ruling on           
appeal potentially invalidating Ocean Capital Nominees’ elections,        
Ocean Capital Nominees could take “a variety of corporate actions         
that  would  be  difficult—if  not impossible—to  unwind,  including      
share repurchases or even liquidation.” (Id. at 21).                      
    Contrariwise,  Ocean  Capital  and  the  Affiliated  Defendants      
argue that the seating of newly elected directors, even those who         

might alter the fund’s management, or a loss of control of a board        
of directors, are insufficient changes to support a finding of            
irreparable harm. (Docket No. 203 at 15). Moreover, Ocean Capital         
and  the  Affiliated   Defendants  stressed  that  to   establish         
irreparable  harm,  Plaintiffs  would  need  to  identify  an  injury     
beyond  compliance  with  the  Court’s  order  to  seat  the  validly     
elected Ocean Capital Nominees. (Id. at 16-17).                           
    The  Magistrate  Judge  found  Plaintiffs’  arguments  to  be        
persuasive.  She  noted  that  if  the  Ocean  Capital  Nominees  were    
seated  on  the  Affected  Funds’  boards  of  directors,  they  could    
influence the decisions of those boards pertaining to important           
matters including the purchase and sale of assets; the Affected           
Funds’  restructuring;  and  or  the  Affected  Funds’  potential         
liquidation. (Docket No. 218 at 7). Such decisions, the Magistrate        
Judge surmised, could disrupt the Affected Funds’ management and          
potentially  cause  the  irreversible  liquidation  of  the  sames’       
assets. (Id.).                                                            
    In the Objection, Ocean Capital and the Affiliated Defendants        
challenged the Magistrate Judge’s determination and stressed that         
the  irreparable  harms  alleged  by  Plaintiffs  are  nebulous  and      
speculative,  and  thus  are  insufficient  to  support  the  Court’s     
issuance of a stay pending appeal. (Docket No. 221 at 22-23).             
Notably, Ocean Capital and the Affiliated Defendants allege that          
the elected Ocean Capital Nominees would lack the authority to            

liquidate the Affected Funds, since such an action requires a two-        
thirds shareholder vote. (Id. at 23). Furthermore, Ocean Capital          
and the Affiliated Defendants highlight that “the newly elected           
[Ocean  Capital  Nominee]  directors’  involvement  in  the  Funds’       
management  does  not  constitute  irreparable  harm  any  more  than     
similar involvement by directors who have been voted out of office        
by wide margins (in some cases years ago), and yet continue to            
make and implement precisely these sorts of decisions.” (Id. at           
221 at 24).                                                               
    The Court agrees with the R&R to the extent that, if seated,         
the Ocean Capital Nominees could influence significant decisions          
of the Affected Funds’ boards of directors, pending this case’s           
review  by  the  First  Circuit.  Moreover,  the  Magistrate  Judge       
rightfully noted that Plaintiffs have presented evidence that the         
Ocean  Capital  Nominees  have  signaled  their  intention  to  take      
actions  that  would  be   challenging  to  undo,  such  as   the         
implementation of a share repurchase program or alternatively, an         
attempt to liquidate the Affected Funds.                                  
    However,  the  Court  also  credits  the  Objection’s  argument,     
that the predicted harm that Ocean Capital Nominees, if seated,           
could  inflict  on  Plaintiffs,  is  speculative  and  overstated.        
Notably, Ocean Capital Nominees, on their own, lack the authority         
to liquidate the Affected Funds. See (Docket Nos. 221-4 at ¶ 15;          
221-11 at 15; 221-12 at 12; 221-13 at 14). In fact, the Articles          

of Incorporation of PRTFF, PRTFF VI, and TFF all provide that major       
corporate  actions  including  but  not  limited  to  a  merger,  a       
consolidation, “a sale, lease or exchange of all or substantially         
all  of  the  assets  of  the  Corporation,”  and  a  liquidation  or     
dissolution of the Corporation require either: (1) “a favorable           
vote of the holders of at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the         
outstanding shares of capital stock”; or (2) an “affirmative vote         
of the holders of two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding shares of           
capital stock of the Corporation” in cases where the action has           
been “approved, adopted or authorized by the affirmative vote of          
at least a two-thirds (2/3) of the total number of Directors fixed        
in accordance with the By-Laws of the Corporation.” See (Docket           
Nos. 221-11 at 15; 221-12 at 12; 221-13 at 14). Thus, while the           
Court accepts that the Ocean Capital Nominees, if seated, will            
likely impact the decisions made by the Affected Funds’ boards of         
directors, it is unclear that such decisions would irreversibly           
harm the Affected Funds in a manner that justifies the imposition         
of a stay.                                                                
       3.     Substantial Harm to Interested Parties                     

    Plaintiffs allege that “[a] short delay to permit the Funds’         
appeal  does  not  materially  harm  Ocean  Capital”  and  thus,  this    
factor  weighs  in  favor  of  granting  Plaintiff’s  stay  request.      
(Docket  No.  202  at  24).  Conversely,  Ocean  Capital  and  the        
Affiliated Defendants aver that a stay would cause substantial            
harm by delaying the seating of the Affected Funds’ validly elected       
new directors, thus undermining shareholders’ right to select fund        
leadership. (Docket No. 203 at 19).                                       
    In the R&R, the Magistrate Judge acknowledged that a stay            
would delay the expedited relief sought by Ocean Capital and the          
Affiliated Defendants and thus cause them some hardship. (Docket          
No. 218 at 8). The Magistrate Judge, nevertheless, concluded that         
judicial economy and efficiency weighed in favor of staying the           
case pending appeal. (Id.). Moreover, the R&R stated that Ocean           
Capital and the Affiliated Defendants failed to argue that “the           
funds’ performance and governance could suffer harm on account of         
a stay.” (Id.).                                                           
    In  their  Objection  to  the  R&R,  Ocean  Capital  and  the        
Affiliated Defendants argue that a stay would not only delay the          
seating of the validly elected Ocean Capital Nominees but would           
also undermine the desires of the Affected Funds’ shareholders.           
(Docket No. 221 at 25). Such delay, according to Ocean Capital and        
the  Affiliated  Defendants,  would  prevent  those  newly  elected       
directors from acting in accord with their promises to address the        
Affected Funds’ poor financial performance to the benefit of the          
Affected Funds’ shareholders. (Id.). The Objection argues that the        
Magistrate Judge failed to address the irreparable harm to Affected       
Funds’  shareholders  “associated  with  the  deprivation  of  their      
fundamental right to choose the directors who will oversee the            

Funds that they own.” (Id. at 26). Finally, Ocean Capital and the         
Affiliated  Defendants  highlight  that  the  protracted  delay  in       
allowing the Ocean Capital Nominees to be seated during the terms         
for which they were elected to serve might even have the effect of        
“depriv[ing] the elected directors of the entirety of their elected       
terms. [Given that] [t]he average length of a First Circuit appeal.       
. .is 13.7 months.” (Id. at 26).                                          
    The Court finds Ocean Capital and the Affiliated Defendants          
objections  to  the  R&R  to  be  persuasive.  Critically,  the  Ocean    
Capital Nominees were elected to the Affected Funds’ boards of            
directors at least, in part, as a response to shareholder concerns        
about those Funds’ economic productivity under the incumbent board        
of directors. Thus, a stay would impose the same harm on Ocean            
Capital and the Affiliated Defendants as the denial of a stay would       
inflict  on  Plaintiffs:  to  wit,  important  decisions  made  by  a     
potentially wrongfully seated board of directors. As such, the            
Court finds that this factor does not clearly weigh in favor in           
the issuance of a stay.                                                   
       4.     Public Interest                                            

    Finally, Plaintiffs argue that “[p]ermitting the validation          
of election results on the basis of proxies solicited in violation        
of the federal securities laws does not serve the public interest.”       
(Docket No. 202 at 24). Notably, Plaintiffs stress that the purpose       
of  the  Exchange  Act  and  federal  securities  regulations  are  to    
ensure  that  securities  markets  are  honest  and  transparent  to      
promote investor confidence. (Id.). Moreover, Plaintiffs aver that        
a stay is in the interest of judicial efficiency and preservation         
of limited court resources. (Id. at 24-25).                               
    Ocean Capital and the Affiliated Defendants, on the other            
hand, argue that a stay delaying the seating of the validly elected       
Ocean  Capital  Nominees  is  contrary  to  the  public  interest  and    
“risks weakening or even effectively nullifying the value of the          
shareholder  franchise.”   (Docket  No.  203   at  20)   (quoting         
Immunomedics, Inc. v. Venbio Select Advisory LLC, Civil No. 17-           
176 (LPS), 2017 WL 822800, at *3 (D. Del. Mar. 2, 2017)). Ocean           
Capital and the Affiliated Defendants aver that a stay would also         
go against the Commonwealth’s interest in the efficient management        
of Section 3655 actions. (Id.). Additionally, the Opposition to           
Motion for Final Judgment and Stay challenges the argument that a         
stay  would   promote  judicial   efficiency,  emphasizing   that         
Plaintiffs  had  already  conceded  that  the  Court  should  enter  a    
judgment for Ocean Capital on the Counterclaim and a stay would           
merely delay effectuating shareholders’ desires. (Id. at 20-21).          
    The R&R, concludes that a stay in this case would not harm           
the public interest, finding that “Ocean Capital agrees that the          
‘public interest’ prong does not implicate the public interest and        
is,  at  best,  neutral.”  (Docket  No.  218  at  8).  However,  the      
Objection  reiterates  that  “a  stay  that  permits  the  Funds  to      

continue to deny landslide election results harms the Quorum Funds’       
shareholders’ sacrosanct voting rights” which weighs against the          
public’s  interest  in  the  management  of  publicly  traded  funds.     
(Docket No. 221 at 28). Moreover, Ocean Capital and the Affiliated        
Defendants again emphasize that a stay would undermine Section            
3655 policy which centers the public’s interest in efficiently            
managing  this  type  of  proceeding  to  prevent  paralyzing  public     
corporations. (Id.).                                                      
    The Court here agrees with the Magistrate Judge’s averment           
that the Affected Funds’ boards of directors “[are] of exclusive          
pertinence  to  its   shareholders.”  (Docket  No.  218  at   8).         
Accordingly, the issuance of a stay in the present case, which            
would have the effect of temporarily maintaining the incumbent            
board of directors, poses no direct harm to the interests of the          
public at large.                                                          
       5.     Weighing the stay factors                                  

    Having  accepted   the  Magistrate   Judge’s  finding   that         
Plaintiffs at most presented an appeal that possessed potential           
merit and raised a serious legal question, a stay in the present          
case is only justified if the Court finds that Plaintiffs have            
presented  the  unusual  case  where  denying  the  stay  would  cause    
Plaintiffs   to  incur   severe   harm  that   is   significantly         
disproportionate to any harm that Ocean Capital and the Affiliated        
Defendants would suffer should the requested stay be granted.             
    Here, a stay would effectively impact the composition of the         
Affected  Funds’   boards  of  directors   pending  appeal.   The         
composition of those boards would relatedly impact the management         
and administration of those Funds. If the Court were to enter a           
stay, Ocean Capital and the Affiliated Defendants would suffer the        
harm of being bound to the decisions of the incumbent boards of           
directors. If the Court were not to enter a stay, Plaintiffs would        
be subject to the decisions of the new boards of directors which          
include the Ocean Capital Nominees. The projected harms in both           
cases  are  proportional.  Thus,  the  Court  finds  that  Plaintiffs     
failed  to  meet  their  burden  in  demonstrating  the  requisite        
extraordinary  and  asymmetric  harm  necessary  to  compensate  for      
Plaintiffs’ failure to demonstrate that its appeal was likely to          
succeed on the merits.                                                    
    Ultimately,  “[a]  stay  is  an  ‘intrusion  into  the  ordinary     
processes of administration and judicial review’. . . [and while]         
[t]he parties and the public. . .[are] entitled to both careful           
review  and  a  meaningful  decision,  [they]  are  also  generally       
entitled to the prompt execution of orders that the legislature           
has made final.” Nken, 556 U.S. at 427 (quoting Virginia Petroleum        
Jobbers  Assn.  v.  FPC,  259  F.2d  921,  925  (C.A.D.C.1958)  (per      
curiam)). Accordingly, “[a] stay is not a matter of right, even if        
irreparable injury might otherwise result to the appellant.” Does         

1-3 v. Mills, 39 F.4th 20, 25 (1st Cir. 2022) (internal quotations        
omitted); see also Nken, 556 U.S. at 427, Virginian Ry. Co. v.            
United States, 272 U.S. 658, 672 (1926). “What matters as to each         
party is not the raw amount of irreparable harm the party might           
conceivably suffer, but rather the risk of such harm in light of          
the party's chance of success on the merits.” Puerto Rico Hosp.           
Supply, Inc. v. Bos. Sci. Corp., 426 F.3d 503, 507 (1st Cir. 2005)        
(citing Siemens Bldg. Techs., Inc. v. Div. of Asset Capital Mgmt.,        
439 Mass. 759, 791 N.E.2d 340, 343 (2003)). In the instant case,          
Plaintiff   failed   to  demonstrate   that   it   would   suffer         
disproportionate  and  irreparable  harm  whilst  waiting  for  a         
probable judgment in its favor on appeal. Thus, the Court declines        
to grant Plaintiffs’ requested stay.                                      
                        IV.  CONCLUSION                                  
    For the reasons stated above, the Court ADOPTS IN PART the           
R&R at Docket No. 218. As such, the Court ENTERS JUDGMENT in favor        
of Ocean Capital on the Amended Counterclaim. (Docket No. 168).           
The Court DENIES Plaintiffs’ Motion for Final Judgment and Stay.          
(Docket No. 202); finds MOOT Ocean Capital’s Motion for Statutory         
Injunction (Docket No. 169); finds MOOT Ocean Capital’s Motion for        
Expedited Treatment. (Docket No. 206); and finds MOOT Ocean Capital       
LLC and Affiliated Defendants’ Motion for Leave to File Reply in          
Support of Objections (Docket No. 223). The Court ADOPTS the Second       
R&R at Docket No. 226 and thus finds MOOT Plaintiffs’ Motion to           

Dismiss or Stay Counterclaim (Docket No. 171).                            
    IT IS SO ORDERED.                                                    
    In San Juan, Puerto Rico, July 11, 2024.                             


                                  s/Gina R. Méndez-Miró                  
                                  GINA R. MÉNDEZ-MIRÓ                    
                                  UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

---

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                        
               FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO                          


Tax-Free Fixed Income Fund for                                          
Puerto Rico Residents, Inc., et                                         
              al.                                                       
                                 Civil No. 22-1101(GMM)                 
          Plaintiffs                                                    
              v.                                                        
   Ocean Capital LLC, et al.                                            

          Defendants.                                                   

                         OPINION AND ORDER                              
   Before the Court is Magistrate Judge’s Giselle López-Soler           
(“MJ”) August 9, 2023 Report and Recommendation (“R&R”) (Docket           
No. 187) regarding various claims arising under the Securities            
Exchange Act raised in two pending motions (Docket Nos. 122-124).         
For the following reasons, the Court ADOPTS the R&R.                      
                        I.   BACKGROUND                                 
   After presiding over an argumentative hearing on August 26,          
2022 (Docket No. 88) and undertaking a careful review of the record       
before her, the MJ issued a comprehensive and well-reasoned R&R.          
(Docket No. 187). The R&R recommends that Defendant’s Motion for          
Judgement on the Pleadings and Request for Hearing and Motion for         
Failure to State a Claim (Docket Nos. 122-124) be granted given           
that Plaintiffs: (1) failed to advance convincing arguments that          
Defendant’s  amendments  to  their  SEC  filings  did  not  render        
Plaintiff’s  claims  moot,   thereby  stripping  this  Court  of          
jurisdiction;  and  (2)  failed  to  provide  material  evidence,         
required  under  a  Rule  9  heightened  pleadings  standard,  that       
Defendants  engaged  in  fraud  or  misrepresentation.  (Docket  No.      
187).                                                                     
   On  August  24,  2023,  Plaintiffs  collectively  filed   an         
objection to the R&R. (Docket No. 190).                                   
                        II.  DISCUSSION                                 
   In  overseeing  a  case,  the  Court  may  refer  motions  to  a     
Magistrate Judge for review and recommendation. See 28 U.S.C. §           
636(b)(1)(B); Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b); Loc. R. 72). Parties adversely       
affected by an R&R are then invited to “serve and file specific           
written objections to the proposed findings and recommendations”          
within fourteen days of receiving a copy of an R&R. Id.                   
   Upon submitting a timely objection, the Court is required to         
review de novo “those portions of the report or specified proposed        
findings or recommendation to which specific objection is made.”          

Total Petroleum Puerto Rico Corp. v. Fonseca-Marrero, 2018 U.S.           
Dist. LEXIS 197986, 2018 WL 6131777, at *1 (D.P.R. 2018) (quotation       
omitted); see also United States v. Valencia-Copete, 792 F.2d 4           
(1st Cir. 1986). In conducting this review, the Court may “accept,        
reject,  or  modify,  in  whole  or  in  part,  the  findings  or         
recommendations  made  by  the  magistrate  judge.”  28  U.S.C.  §        
636(a)(b)(1). In cases, like the one before the Court, where the          
MJ “produced a first-rate work product, a reviewing tribunal should       
hesitate to wax longiloquent simply to hear its own words resonate.       
Chen v. I.N.S., 87 F.3d 5, 7 (1st Cir. 1996) (quoting In re San           
Juan Dupont Plaza Hotel Fire Litig., 989 F.2d 36, 38 (1st Cir.            
1993)).                                                                   
   Thus, after completing an independent review of the record,          
the MJ’s R&R, and the Plaintiff’s objections to the Magistrate’s          
recommendations,  the  Court  ADOPTS  the  MJ’s  determinations  and      
recommendations for resolving issues presented at Docket Nos. 122-        
124.                                                                      
                          V. CONCLUSION                                 
   For  the  reasons  stated  above,  Defendant’s  Motion   for         
Judgement on the Pleadings and Request for Hearing (Docket No.            
122) is GRANTED, and Defendant’s Motion to Dismiss for Failure to         
State a Claim (Docket No. 123) is also GRANTED.                           
   IT IS SO ORDERED.                                                    
   In San Juan, Puerto Rico, September 8, 2023.                         


                                 s/Gina R. Méndez-Miró                  
                                 GINA R. MÉNDEZ-MIRÓ                    
                                 UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE