UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
               DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                             

                              )                                      
ANDY LUU TRAN,                     )                                      
                              )                                      
     Plaintiff-Appellant,     )                                      
                              )                                      
v.                                 )         CIVIL ACTION                 
                              )         NO. 23-40128-WGY             
CITIZENS BANK N.A. F/K/A           )                                      
RBS CITIZENS, N.A., and            )                                      
HERBERT JACOBS,                    )                                      
                              )                                      
     Defendant-Appellees.     )                                      
                              )                                      
                              )                                      

YOUNG, D.J.                                   January 23, 2024            
                  MEMORANDUM & ORDER                                 
I.   INTRODUCTION                                                         
This case comes before this Court as an appeal from a                
bankruptcy court order and judgment.  The appellant, Andy Luu             
Tran (“Tran”), asks this Court to reverse the Bankruptcy Court’s          
decision, while the appellee, Herbert Jacobs (“Jacobs”),                  
requests the Court affirm the same.                                       
Tran granted Citizens Bank N.A. f/k/a RBS Citizens, N.A.             
(“Citizens Bank”) a mortgage on his property.  Citizens Bank              
foreclosed on the property and sold it to Jacobs who was the              
highest bidder at the foreclosure auction sale.  Citizens Bank            
and Jacobs executed a memorandum of sale.  Subsequently, and              
prepetition, an Affidavit of Sale and a foreclosure deed, the             
latter of which Tran alleges is defective, were recorded.  When           
asked to vacate the property, Tran filed for bankruptcy and               
initiated an adversary bankruptcy proceeding, contending that he          
still retained the equity of redemption over the mortgaged                

property, and could avoid the transfer of his equity of                   
redemption because the foreclosure deed’s defects rendered the            
transfer void as incompliant with the Commonwealth’s applicable           
notice requirements.                                                      
Having reviewed the entire record, including the bankruptcy          
court docket, see Bankruptcy Docket, ECF No. 2 (“Bankruptcy               
Docket”), this Court holds that Tran’s equity of redemption               
extinguished at the conclusion of the foreclosure auction sale            
upon the execution of a memorandum of sale between Citizens Bank          
and Jacobs.  This Court also holds that the Affidavit of Sale             
relating to the auction sale that was properly recorded provided          
constructive notice to third parties such that Tran is unable to          

avoid the transfer and the extinguishment of his equity of                
redemption.  Accordingly, and for the reasons stated below, this          
Court affirms the Bankruptcy Court’s decision.                            
II.  PROCEDURAL HISTORY                                                   
On September 13, 2022, Tran filed for Chapter 13                     
bankruptcy.  Statement of Material Facts ¶ 6, Bankruptcy Docket           
No. 33 (“Material Facts”).1  On September 14, 2022, Tran filed a          
complaint in the Bankruptcy Court, seeking to recover his real            
property located at 47 Clinton Street, Framingham, Massachusetts          
(the “Property”), which was subject to a mortgage encumbering             
title to the Property, with Tran as the mortgagor and Citizens            

Bank as the mortgagee.  See Compl. to Avoid Unperfected Pre-              
Petition Transfer, Bankruptcy Docket No. 1 (“Compl.”).                    
After both Citizens Bank and Jacobs responded to the                 
Complaint, Tran moved for judgment on the pleadings, which the            
Bankruptcy Court, following a hearing and with the assent of all          
parties, converted into a motion for summary judgment.  See               
Order 1, Bankruptcy Docket No. 38 (“Bankruptcy Court Decision”).          
The parties were given an opportunity to provide supplemental             
pleadings, which they did, and Citizens Bank and Jacobs moved             
for summary judgment in their favor.  Id. at 1-2.                         
On August 7, 2023, the Bankruptcy Court granted summary              
judgment in favor of Citizens Bank and Jacobs and against Tran.           

Id. at 2.  In reaching that conclusion, the Bankruptcy Court              
held that Tran was unable to avoid the prepetition transfer of            
the Property because his equity of redemption over the Property           
had extinguished when the foreclosure auction concluded with the          

1 As noted in the Bankruptcy Court Decision, the Statement           
of Material Facts state “uncontested facts” on which the                  
Bankruptcy Judge, among other submissions, relied in his                  
decision.  See Bankruptcy Court Decision 2.                               
execution of a memorandum of sale.  Id. at 4.  The Bankruptcy             
Court held further that the delivery of a deed was not required           
to “complete[]” the foreclosure sale and that the execution of a          
memorandum of sale was sufficient to complete foreclosure and             
thus extinguish Tran’s equity of redemption as mortgagor.  Id.            

Finally, while acknowledging that the foreclosure deed was                
incomplete, as it lacked proper notarization, id. at 5                    
(referring to “the incomplete foreclosure deed”), the Bankruptcy          
Court nonetheless held that it did not need to reach the issue            
of whether an incomplete deed gave rise to the necessary                  
constructive notice to third parties to effectuate the transfer           
of the equity of redemption, id. at 5-6.  The Bankruptcy Court            
also held that the recordation of the Affidavit of Sale provided          
constructive notice to a hypothetical bona fide purchaser.  Id.           
at 5-6.  For these reasons, the Bankruptcy Court concluded that           
the equity of redemption on the Property, once belonging to Tran          
as the mortgagor, had been lawfully extinguished.  Id. at 6.              

Subsequently, on August 29, 2023, the Bankruptcy Court denied             
Tran’s motion for relief from judgment.  See Order on Mot. for            
Relief from J., Bankruptcy Docket No. 44.                                 
Tran then filed this appeal, contending that his equity of           
redemption extinguished, not upon the execution of a memorandum           
of sale at the close of the foreclosure auction, but at the time          
of the transfer of the deed, which in this case was defective             
and therefore incapable of extinguishing said equity of                   
redemption.  See Opening Br. of Appellant (“Appellant’s Br.”),            
ECF No. 7.  The parties properly briefed the issue.  See Opening          
Br. of Appellee (“Appellee’s Br.”), ECF. No. 8; Reply Br. for             
Appellant (“Appellant’s Reply”), ECF No. 9; Surreply of Appellee          

(“Appellee’s Surreply”), ECF No. 13; Reply to Mot. Leave to File          
Surreply (“Appellant’s Surreply”), ECF. No. 11; Herbert Jacobs’           
Resp. to Debtors’ Citation of Suppl. Authority (“Appellee’s               
Resp. Suppl. Authority”), ECF No. 14.                                     
The Court has carefully reviewed the entire record                   
pertaining to this case as well as the orders and judgments               
entered by the Bankruptcy Court before preparing this opinion.            
III.  FACTS ALLEGED                                                       
The material facts in this case are uncontested.                     
Bankruptcy Court Decision 2.  On May 27, 2008, Tran granted a             
mortgage on the Property to Citizens Bank.  Material Facts ¶ 1.           
Citizens Bank foreclosed on the mortgage and on August 16, 2022,          

Jacobs purchased the property at a foreclosure auction.  Id. ¶            
2.  On the same day, Citizens Bank and Jacobs signed a                    
memorandum of sale in connection with the purchase.  Id. ¶ 3.             
On August 22, 2022, a foreclosure deed regarding the purchase             
was signed.  Id. ¶ 4.  The deed and an Affidavit of Sale                  
relating to the sale and purchase was recorded on September 8,            
2022.  Appellant’s Br. 2; Appellee’s Br. 5.  Days later, on               
September 12, 2022, Jacobs served Tran a notice to vacate the             
Property.  Appellee’s Br. 5.  Tran then filed for Chapter 13              
bankruptcy on September 13, 2022, and a day later, on September           
14, 2022, an adversary proceeding was initiated in the                    
Bankruptcy Court, which has given rise to the present appeal.             

Id.; see also Compl.; Appellant’s Br. 2.                                  
Crucially, Tran takes issue with the foreclosure deed                
relating to the sale and purchase of the Property by Citizens             
Bank and Jacobs, signed on August 22, 2022, and recorded on               
September 8, 2022.  To be sure, Tran agrees that the deed was             
recorded prior to Tran’s Chapter 13 petition, and therefore               
prepetition.  Appellant’s Br. 2 (“Pre-petition, a foreclosure             
deed was recorded . . . .”).  He argues, however, that the deed           
was defective and therefore unable to put third parties on                
constructive notice of the Property’s conveyance to Jacobs.  To           
that end, Tran makes three specific arguments.                            
First, Tran contends that the deed was deficient because it          

was not notarized, rendering it incompliant with applicable laws          
of the Commonwealth.  Id. at 2 (mentioning the lack of a                  
“notarized deed” (emphasis in original) and that “[t]he deed              
that was recorded was missing a notarization altogether”); id.            
at 4 (arguing that the deed has a “latent defect”); see also              
Appellant’s Reply 2 (arguing that the “deed is void and was               
‘improvidently recorded’”); Compl. ¶ 10 (arguing that the deed            
“as recorded lacks an acknowledgment as required” by the laws of          
Commonwealth and therefore “was ‘improvidently’ recorded, and is          
no effect as a transfer of title”).                                       
Second, Tran argues that the deed, because it was                    
“improvidently recorded,” does not provide constructive notice            

to third parties of the extinguishment of his equity of                   
redemption, and therefore, that he retains the equity of                  
redemption over the Property.  See, e.g., Appellant’s Br. 4               
(arguing that the lack of notarization “prevents the deed from            
giving constructive notice to anyone”); id. at 5 (contending              
that “the deed was improvidently recorded and does not give               
constructive notice”); Appellant’s Reply 2 (contending that “the          
equity of redemption was not extinguished” (emphasis in                   
original)); Appellant’s Surreply 2 (asking this Court to remand           
the Bankruptcy Court Decision “for entry of judgment in Tran’s            
favor, avoiding the transfer of Mr. Tran’s equity of                      
redemption”).                                                             

Third, Tran argues that the Affidavit of Sale, attesting to          
the sale and purchase of the Property by Citizens Bank and                
Jacobs, signed on August 22, 2022, and recorded on September 8,           
2022, cannot be substituted for a properly executed and recorded          
deed, and therefore cannot be regarded as having given                    
constructive notice to third parties of the sale that would               
extinguish his equity of redemption on the Property.                      
Appellant’s Br. 2 (“There was only an Affidavit of Sale, which            
is not the same thing [as a notarized deed.]”); id. at 5                  
(arguing that the “Affidavit of Sale does not cure the latent             
defect” and that “the deed was improvidently recorded and does            
not give constructive notice”); Appellant’s Reply 2 (arguing              

that “an ‘affidavit’ is not a ‘deed’”); id. (“Whether the                 
affidavit was ‘properly recorded’ is irrelevant.”); id. (“All             
that the affidavit gives notice of is that the equity of                  
redemption was sold, not that the property was conveyed.”).               
In response, Jacobs contends that “there is no need to               
reach [the] issue” of whether the deed was defective and void.            
Appellee’s Surreply 3 n.1.  This, Jacobs argues, is because the           
execution and recording of a deed is not necessary to extinguish          
Tran’s equity of redemption; said equity extinguishes, Jacobs             
contends, as of the moment of the foreclosure auction sale’s              
conclusion, of which third parties were put on constructive               
notice via the proper execution and recording of the Affidavit            

of Sale relating to the foreclosure sale.  Appellee’s Br. 8               
(arguing that “[t]he [e]quity [o]f [r]edemption [w]as                     
[e]xtinguished [a]t [t]he [f]oreclosure [a]uction”); id. at 10            
(arguing that “[t]he [a]ffidavit [o]f [s]ale [p]rovides                   
[c]onstructive [n]otice [o]f [t]he [f]oreclosure [s]ale”); see            
also Appellee’s Surreply 3 n.1 (approvingly citing the                    
Bankruptcy Court Decision’s holding that “the Affidavit of Sale           
that was recorded did provide constructive notice” (quoting               
Bankruptcy Court Decision 5-6)).                                          
IV.  ANALYSIS                                                             
Tran asks this Court to review and reverse the Bankruptcy            
Court Decision as “a manifest error of law.”  Appellant Br. 7.            

In essence, the parties’ contentions require this Court to                
determine the precise moment at which a mortgagor’s -- here,              
Tran’s -- equity of redemption over a mortgaged property legally          
extinguishes.                                                             
First, Tran asks the Court to reverse the Bankruptcy                 
Court’s holding that his equity of redemption extinguished at             
the conclusion of the foreclosure auction and not when the deed           
was recorded.  See Bankruptcy Court Decision 4 (“It is settled            
law that, when a foreclosure auction concludes with an accepted           
bid and the execution of a memorandum of sale, a mortgagor’s              
equity of redemption is extinguished.”); id. (“A foreclosure              
sale is not ‘completed’ by delivery of the deed . . . .”).                

Jacobs contends that Tran’s equity of redemption extinguished             
when the foreclosure auction was concluded.  See Appellee’s Br.           
2.                                                                        
Second, Tran asks the Court to reverse the Bankruptcy                
Court’s holding that the execution and recording of the                   
Affidavit of Sale put third parties on constructive notice of             
the conclusion of the foreclosure auction, thus extinguishing             
Tran’s equity of redemption.  See Bankruptcy Court Decision 5-6           
(holding that “the Affidavit of Sale that was recorded did                
provide constructive notice . . . and as such, a trustee could            
not avoid the transfer (extinguishment) of [Tran’s] equity of             
redemption over the Property” (footnote omitted)).                        

All parties agree that the central issues here are properly          
categorized as issues of law.  Appellant’s Br. 1; Appellee’s Br.          
4.                                                                        
As articulated in greater detail below, this Court agrees            
with the Bankruptcy Court, and, therefore, rejects this appeal.           
A.   Standard of Review                                              
This Court reviews a bankruptcy court’s conclusions of law           
de novo, and its findings of fact subject to a “clearly                   
erroneous” standard.  See Sharfarz v. Goguen, 691 F.3d 62, 68             
(1st Cir. 2012); Stoehr v. Mohamed, 244 F.3d 206, 207-08 (1st             
Cir. 2001).  A bankruptcy court’s entry of summary judgment, as           
is the case here, warrants de novo review.  See Sharfarz, 691             

F.3d at 68; Autism Intervention Specialists, LLC v. Aoude, 654            
B.R. 41, 46 (D. Mass. 2023).                                              
Since the issues presented on appeal in this case are                
matters of law, this Court will exercise de novo review.  Cf.             
DeNadai v. Preferred Cap. Mkts., 272 B.R. 21, 27 (D. Mass. 2001)          
(“The parties agree that there is no dispute as to a material             
fact and that the present appeal presents only legal issues               
subject to de novo review.”).                                             
B.   The Bankruptcy Court Correctly Held that the Equity of          
     Redemption Extinguishes Upon Execution of a Memorandum          
     of Sale.                                                        
  1.   Generally                                                     
The crux of the legal issue presented in this appeal is              
when in time a mortgagor’s equity of redemption extinguishes.             
Tran argues that said equity does not extinguish at the                   
conclusion of a foreclosure auction, but rather when the highest          
bidder at the auction pays the consideration “and the deed is             
delivered, and not before.”  Appellant’s Reply 2 (emphasis in             
original).  Jacobs contends that the equity of redemption                 
extinguishes at the conclusion of the foreclosure auction, of             
which third parties were put on constructive notice via a signed          
and recorded Affidavit of Sale, and not when the deed is                  
delivered.  See Appellee’s Br. 8-9.  The Bankruptcy Court                 
Decision sides with Jacobs, holding that “[i]t is settled law             
that, when a foreclosure auction concludes with an accepted bid           

and the execution of a memorandum of sale, a mortgagor’s equity           
of redemption is extinguished.”  Bankruptcy Court Decision 4.             
For the reasons explained below, this Court agrees with the               
Bankruptcy Court.                                                         
The Commonwealth subscribes to the so-called “title theory”          
of mortgage law.  See, e.g., United States Bank Nat'l Ass'n v.            
Ibanez, 458 Mass. 637, 649 (2011) (“In a ‘title theory state’             
like Massachusetts, a mortgage is a transfer of legal title in a          
property to secure a debt.”); Lemelson v. United States Bank              
Nat'l Ass'n, 721 F.3d 18, 23 (1st Cir. 2013) (“It is beyond               
dispute that Massachusetts subscribes to the ‘title theory’ of            

mortgage law.”); Culhane v. Aurora Loan Servs. of Nebraska, 708           
F.3d 282, 292 (1st Cir. 2013) (describing the Commonwealth as “a          
title theory state”).  In the Commonwealth, therefore, the grant          
of a mortgage transfers legal title to the mortgaged property             
from the mortgagor to the mortgagee, but the equity of                    
redemption, that is, the mortgagor’s right to recover property            
prior to a foreclosure, is not subject to transfer by the mere            
grant of a mortgage.  Bevilacqua v. Rodriguez, 460 Mass. 762,             
774 (2011) (“In Massachusetts, a ‘mortgage splits the title in            
two parts: the legal title, which becomes the mortgagee’s, and            
the equitable title, which the mortgagor retains.’” (quoting              
Maglione v. BancBoston Mtge. Corp., 29 Mass. App. Ct. 88, 90              

(1990)); see also Lemelson, 721 F.3d at 27.  Rather, the                  
mortgagor retains the equity of redemption until and unless the           
mortgagee forecloses on the mortgaged property.  At issue here            
is the precise timing of such foreclosure that extinguishes a             
mortgagor’s equity of redemption.                                         
The relevant provision before the Court is the concluding            
clause of Massachusetts General Laws, chapter 244, section 18,            
which provides that the equity of redemption continues “unless            
the land has been sold pursuant to a power of sale contained in           
the mortgage deed.”  Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 244, § 18 (emphasis              
added).  The parties disagree as to the exact moment at which             
the foreclosure sale mentioned in the provision occurs.                   
  2.   Beal is Not Applicable to the Present Appeal                  

Both parties cite to caselaw to support their respective             
contentions as to timing.  Tran essentially cites to Beal v.              
Attleborough Savings Bank, 248 Mass. 342 (1924), a decision by            
the Commonwealth’s Supreme Judicial Court, to assert that a               
foreclosure auction’s conclusion and the execution of a sale and          
purchase agreement do not suffice to extinguish the equity of             
redemption, and that the proper transfer of a deed is required.           
See Appellant’s Reply 2.  In Beal, the Supreme Judicial Court             
held that the mortgagor retained the equity of redemption after           
the auction sale and until the delivery of the deed to the                
purchaser.  248 Mass. at 343 (“The auction sale was in effect a           
mere contract of sale. The sale was not executed until the deed           

was delivered, when the title passed to the purchaser.”); id. at          
345 (“Up to that time [i.e., delivery of the deed], the                   
plaintiff had an equity of redemption . . . .”).                          
Jacobs, on the other hand, mainly cites to Outpost Cafe,             
Inc. v. Fairhaven Savings Bank, 3 Mass. App. Ct. 1 (1975), which          
is a decision by the Massachusetts Appeals Court.  See                    
Appellee’s Br. 8-10.  Outpost Cafe held that “‘foreclosure is             
complete’ at the time of the auction sale[,]” 3 Mass. App. Ct.            
at 5 (quoting Way v. Mullett, 143 Mass. 49, 53 (1886)), and that          
the right of redemption is therefore barred from the moment of            
the conclusion of the auction sale, id. at 7 (“[P]laintiff’s              

equity of redemption was barred . . . at least as early as the            
point in time when the memorandum of sale was executed with the           
purchaser at the foreclosure sale.”).                                     
Tran, recognizing a possible tension between these two               
cases, in that Outpost Cafe “call[s] Beal into question” on the           
question of the timing of extinguishment, Appellant’s Reply 2             
n.2, asserts that Beal, as a ruling by the highest state court            
in the Commonwealth, to wit, the “Supreme Judicia[l] Court[],”            
“effectively overrules Outpost [Cafe], at least in part,” id.             
In response, Jacobs contends that Beal, decided in 1924, could            
not have overruled Outpost Cafe, decided in 1975, because Beal            
predated Outpost Cafe by 51 years.  Appellee’s Surreply 2.                

Subsequently, Tran acknowledged that overruling was an               
“infelicitous choice of words,” Appellant’s Surreply 1, but he            
still argues that Beal, although earlier in time, by virtue of            
being the decision of the Supreme Judicial Court, ought control           
to the extent it conflicts with the decision in Outpost Cafe, a           
decision by the Massachusetts Appeals Court, id.  Tran further            
argues that so long as the Supreme Judicial Court did not                 
overrule its own precedent, Beal remains good law, and that the           
Appeals Court cannot “discredit” a decision by the Supreme                
Judicial Court.  Id.                                                      
  The Supreme Judicial Court is the “final arbiter” of the           
laws of the Commonwealth.  Genereux v. Raytheon Co., 754 F.3d             

51, 57 (1st Cir. 2014); see also Commonwealth v. Vasquez, 456             
Mass. 350, 356 (2010) (“[The Supreme Judicial Court] is the               
highest appellate authority in the Commonwealth, and our                  
decisions on all questions of law are conclusive on all                   
Massachusetts trial courts and the Appeals Court.”).                      
Consequently, and further, the Commonwealth’s Appeals Court, in           
its own words, is “bound to follow the decisions of the Supreme           
Judicial Court.”  Commonwealth v. Colon, 52 Mass. App. Ct. 725,           
730 n.1 (2001).  Therefore, until and unless overruled by the             
Supreme Judicial Court, Beal cannot be overruled by Outpost               
Cafe, a decision by an intermediate appellate court of the                
Commonwealth.  The Supreme Judicial Court has not overruled               

Beal, and conversely, has approvingly cited it as recently as             
2001.  See Kelley v. Neilson, 433 Mass. 706, 714 n.16 (2001);             
see also Appellant’s Surreply 1 (mentioning Kelley’s reference            
to Beal).  Thus, Beal remains in force.                                   
That Beal remains in force, however, is not to suggest, as           
Tran does, that it is controlling in the present case.  To be             
sure, Beal does include language suggesting that the equity of            
redemption would not be extinguished by the close of an auction           
sale but rather would be retained by the mortgagor until                  
conveyance.  See Beal, 248 Mass. at 343, 345.  Subsequent cases           
by the Supreme Judicial Court, however, have distinguished that           
language in Beal.  Most notably, and as Jacobs also points out,           

Appellee’s Surreply 2, the Supreme Judicial Court clarified a             
few years after Beal, in a decision written by the Justice who            
had written the Beal opinion, that “[Beal] is not an authority            
for the contention that the right to redeem continues until the           
conveyance is made.”  White v. Macarelli, 267 Mass. 596, 599              
(1929).  White thus states that Beal cannot be cited as                   
authority for the contention that the equity of redemption                
extinguishes not at the conclusion of a foreclosure auction sale          
but when conveyance takes place via the transfer and recording            
of a duly executed deed.  Id.                                             
In addition, while Tran correctly observes that Beal has             
been continuously and approvingly cited by courts, including the          

Supreme Judicial Court, citations to Beal following White have            
followed White’s clarification that Beal ought not be cited for           
the contention that the equity of redemption survives an auction          
sale and until conveyance.  See, e.g., Kelley, 433 Mass. at 714           
n.16; Laurin v. De Carolis Constr. Co., 372 Mass. 688, 691                
(1977); Kattor v. Adams, 323 Mass. 686, 689 (1949).  These                
subsequent citations to Beal have recruited that case in aid of           
the proposition that the mortgagor is entitled to rents and               
profits received by the mortgagee during the time intervening             
between the auction sale and the delivery of the deed to the              
purchaser, which has no bearing on the equity of redemption and           
the precise time at which it extinguishes.  See, e.g., Kelley,            

433 Mass. at 714 n.16; Laurin, 372 Mass. at 691; Kattor, 323              
Mass. at 689.                                                             
For the foregoing reasons, Tran cannot rely on Beal to               
argue that the equity of redemption over the Property did not             
extinguish when the memorandum of sale was executed at the                
conclusion of the foreclosure auction.                                    
  3.   Other Cases Establish That the Equity of Redemption           
       Extinguishes When a Memorandum of Sale is Executed            
Having established Beal’s inapplicability to the present             
dispute concerning the precise time at which the equity of                
redemption extinguishes, this Court now proceeds to survey other          
cases that provide guidance.  Caselaw from both this District             
and the Commonwealth amply demonstrates that the equity of                
redemption is extinguished at the conclusion of a foreclosure             
auction sale as of the moment a memorandum of sale is executed.           
The Court begins with a survey of how the timing question            
has been treated by the courts of the Commonwealth.  In Outpost           
Cafe, upon which Jacobs repeatedly relies, see, e.g., Appellee’s          
Br. 8-10, the Commonwealth’s Appeals Court held that “the                 
plaintiff’s equity of redemption was barred . . . at least as             
early as the point in time when the memorandum of sale was                
executed with the purchaser at the foreclosure sale.”  3 Mass.            
App. Ct. at 7.  Subsequent decisions by the Appeals Court have            
continued to follow Outpost Cafe’s holding.  See, e.g., Boston            

Redevelopment Auth. v. Boston Priv. Bank & Tr. Co., 2020 Mass.            
App. Unpub. LEXIS 746, at *2-3 (Mass. App. Ct. Aug. 6, 2020)              
(“Many of the rights of the mortgagor, such as the right of               
redemption, terminate upon execution of the memorandum of                 
sale.”); Guempel v. Great Am. Ins. Co., 11 Mass. App. Ct. 845,            
849 (1981).  One decision, tellingly, held that Outpost Cafe’s            
holding that the equity of redemption extinguishes upon the               
execution of a memorandum of sale is “well-settled.”  Housman v.          
LBM Fin., LLC, 80 Mass. App. Ct. 213, 220 (2011) (“It is well-            
settled that the power of sale is exercised at the time of the            
actual sale and terminates the owner’s equity of redemption.”).           
More importantly, the Supreme Judicial Court has agreed              

with the Commonwealth’s Appeals Court on this point.                      
Approvingly citing Outpost Cafe, the Supreme Judicial Court held          
that “[t]he execution of the memorandum of sale terminated the            
plaintiffs’ equity of redemption.”  Williams v. Resolution GGF            
Oy, 417 Mass. 377, 384 (1994).  As such, the interpretation by            
the Commonwealth’s intermediate appellate court that a                    
mortgagor’s equity of redemption extinguishes as of the moment a          
memorandum of sale is executed at an auction sale has been                
affirmed by the highest court in the Commonwealth.2  That the             
Supreme Judicial Court has agreed with Outpost Cafe’s holding in          
Williams renders unmeritorious Tran’s contention that Outpost             
Cafe is an “outlier.”  Appellant’s Surreply 2.  On the contrary,          

Outpost Cafe, as approvingly cited by the Supreme Judicial Court          
in Williams, provides the controlling statement as to when a              
mortgagor’s equity of redemption extinguishes in the                      
Commonwealth -- and the statement is that such equity                     
extinguishes “when the memorandum of sale was executed with the           
purchaser at the foreclosure sale.”  Outpost Cafe, 3 Mass. App.           
Ct. at 7.                                                                 
This Court now proceeds to survey caselaw from the district          
in which it sits.  The bankruptcy courts in this district that            
have been called upon to confront this issue of timing have, not          
surprisingly, followed the courts of the Commonwealth.  As early          
as 1997, merely three years after the Supreme Judicial Court              


2 Williams, which affirmed Outpost Cafe’s interpretation,            
was decided in 1994.  In 2005, a bankruptcy court confronting             
the same question of when does the equity of redemption                   
extinguish observed that “were the Supreme Judicial Court                 
confronted with the issue of when is a property, or rather                
the equity of redemption, sold at a foreclosure sale, it would            
conclude that the sale occurs when the memorandum of sale is              
signed.”  In re Crichlow, 322 B.R. 229, 238 (Bankr. D. Mass.              
2005) (Hillman, J.).  Through Williams, the Supreme Judicial              
Court has indeed had the opportunity to provide its                       
interpretation on this issue.                                             
expressed agreement with Outpost Cafe’s holding in Williams, a            
bankruptcy court noted that “[i]t is well-settled                         
under Massachusetts law that where a foreclosure sale is                  
properly conducted, the redemption rights of a mortgagor                  
terminate as early as the execution of the memorandum of sale.”           

In re Theoclis, 213 B.R. 880, 882 (Bankr. D. Mass. 1997)                  
(Boroff, J.).  Subsequent bankruptcy court decisions from this            
district have expressed agreement.  See, e.g., In re Kaplan, No.          
06-41771-JBR, 2006 WL 3757711, at *3 (Bankr. D. Mass. Dec. 19,            
2006) (Rosenthal, J.) (“Property sold at foreclosure under a              
power of sale in a mortgage terminates a mortgagor’s right to             
redeem the property.”); In re Grassie, 293 B.R. 829, 831 (Bankr.          
D. Mass. 2003) (Hillman, J.) (“The power of sale is a completed           
sale that occurs upon the execution of the memorandum of sale.            
The execution of the memorandum of sale terminates a debtor's             
equity of redemption.”); In re Dow, 250 B.R. 6, 8 (Bankr. D.              
Mass. 2000) (Queenan, J.) (holding that “under Massachusetts law          

redemption rights still exist until the execution of a                    
memorandum of sale following the bidding process”); id. (“My              
colleagues in this district have come to the same conclusion in           
cases where the memorandum of sale was executed prior to the              
bankruptcy filing.”).                                                     
More specifically, expressing agreement with the cases               
surveyed above, it was held in at least one bankruptcy court              
case that the contention of “a foreclosure sale being actually            
completed by delivery of a deed” was unmeritorious, as the sale           
was completed by the execution of a memorandum of sale.  In re            
Crichlow, 322 B.R. at 237.  This responds directly to Tran’s              
contention that the equity of redemption is transferred “when             

the high bidder pays the consideration and the deed is                    
delivered, and not before.”  Appellant’s Reply 2 (emphasis in             
original).                                                                
Tran unpersuasively cites to a case from this district in            
further aid of his contention concerning timing.  See                     
Appellant’s Surreply 1-2 (discussing Zagarella v. Caliber Home            
Loans, No. CV 18-12414-NMG, 2019 WL 3021261 (D. Mass. June 7,             
2019) (Bowler, M.J.)).  Zagarella contains no holding or dictum           
that explicitly implicates the question of timing.  See                   
Appellee’s Resp. Suppl. Authority 1-2.  In fact, if anything,             
Zagarella references decisions by the courts of the Commonwealth          
that in turn have acknowledged that a mortgagor’s equity of               

redemption extinguishes at the foreclosure auction sale when a            
memorandum of sale is executed.  See, e.g., Zagarella, 2019 WL            
3021261, at *5 (referring to Housman, which, among other things,          
approvingly quotes Outpost Cafe and other decisions that have             
held that the equity of redemption extinguishes upon the                  
execution of a memorandum of sale).                                       
Finally, this Court also takes note that on the question of          
timing, other sessions in this district, too, have uniformly              
followed the courts of the Commonwealth.  See, e.g., Dickey v.            
United States Bank Tr., N.A. as Tr. for LSF9 Master                       
Participation Tr., No. CV 19-12504-FDS, 2020 WL 4474273, at *5            

(D. Mass. Aug. 3, 2020) (Saylor, C.J.), aff'd, No. 20-1866, 2021          
WL 7627516 (1st Cir. Nov. 1, 2021) (“Furthermore, under                   
Massachusetts law, a mortgagor's equity of redemption is                  
extinguished at the time the foreclosure sale is concluded, not           
when the deed is recorded.”); Shaw v. Bank of America, NA, No.            
10-CV-11021, 2015 WL 224666, at *10 (D. Mass. Jan. 15, 2015)              
(Casper, J.) (“BOA is correct that the equity of redemption is            
extinguished by the memorandum of sale.”).  Moreover, one of the          
sessions of this Court, like the observations made by the                 
Commonwealth’s courts, described the rule as being “well-                 
settled.”  Barbosa v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., No. CIV.A. 12-              
12236-DJC, 2013 WL 4056180, at *9 (D. Mass. Aug. 13, 2013)                

(Casper, J.) (quoting Housman, 80 Mass. App. Ct. at 220-21).              
This Court therefore concludes it well-settled by both the           
courts of the Commonwealth and in this district that in the               
Commonwealth, a mortgagor’s equity of redemption extinguishes             
upon the execution of a memorandum of sale at the auction sale.           
Tran’s contentions to the contrary are rejected.                          
In the present appeal, as the record establishes, a                  
memorandum of sale -- stylized as such -- was executed on August          
16, 2022, at 12:13 P.M.  See Answer to Compl. Filed by Herbert            
Jacobs 12-17, Bankruptcy Docket No.15 (“Answer to Compl. Filed            
by Herbert Jacobs”).  Further, the memorandum of sale, signed by          
both Citizens Bank and Jacobs, clearly describes the Property             

and mentions the purchase price.  See id.  Tran, in his                   
submissions, has not alleged that the memorandum of sale is               
defective.  See Bankruptcy Court Decision 2 (“The parties do not          
dispute that Citizens conducted an auction of the Property at             
which Jacobs was the high bidder and that a memorandum of sale .          
. . was executed by Citizens and Jacobs before [Tran] filed his           
petition.”).                                                              
  4.   Tran’s Equity of Redemption Extinguished Upon the             
       Execution of the Memorandum of Sale                           
As has been consistently and continuously interpreted by             
the Commonwealth’s courts, therefore, the memorandum of sale              
that was duly executed on August 16, 2022, Material Facts ¶ 2,            
and prior to Tran’s petition for bankruptcy that was filed on             
September 13, 2022, id. ¶ 6, extinguished Tran’s equity of                
redemption.                                                               
This Court therefore affirms the Bankruptcy Court Decision           
holding that Tran’s equity of redemption extinguished                     
prepetition.  See Bankruptcy Court Decision 4 (“It is settled             
law that, when a foreclosure auction concludes with an accepted           
bid and the execution of a memorandum of sale, a mortgagor’s              
equity of redemption is extinguished”); id. at 5 (referring to            
Tran’s equity of redemption as “an extinguished equity of                 
redemption”).                                                             
C.   The Bankruptcy Court Correctly Held That the Affidavit          
     of Sale Provides Constructive Notice of the                     
     Foreclosure Auction Sale.                                       
The second and related issue that arises in this appeal              
concerns the question whether Tran can avoid the transfer                 
(extinguishment) of his equity of redemption.  Section 522(h) of          
the Bankruptcy Code grants debtors the possibility to avoid a             
transfer of their property -- in this case, their equity of               
redemption -- if “such transfer is avoidable by the trustee               
under section 544” and if “the trustee does not attempt to avoid          
such transfer.”  11 U.S.C. § 522(h)(1)-(2); see also In re                
Piper, 291 B.R. 20, 23 (Bankr. D. Mass. 2003) (Kenner, J.)                
(“Section 522(h) of the Bankruptcy Code permits the debtor to             
exercise the trustee’s avoidance powers under §§ 544(a) and 545           
in certain circumstance: where, by exercise of                            

the avoidance power, the debtor would recover an asset that he            
or she can claim as exempt.”).  Section 544, as interpreted by            
the Supreme Court, “set[s] out circumstances under which a                
trustee can avoid unrecorded liens and conveyances.”  Merit               
Mgmt. Grp., LP v. FTI Consulting, Inc., 583 U.S. 366, 371                 
(2018).  One of those circumstances arises when a trustee may             
avoid any obligation incurred by the debtor that is voidable by           
“a real or hypothetical bona fide purchaser, regardless of any            
actual knowledge of the obligation by the trustee.”  United               
States Bank, N.A. v. Desmond (In re Mbazira), 15 F.4th 106, 111           
(1st Cir. 2021) (describing 11 U.S.C. § 544(a)(3)).3  “Thus,              

[under this section,] the trustee can only void a mortgage                
obligation if it did not have constructive notice of the                  
encumbrance.”  Id.                                                        
The question before this Court is whether a good faith               
purchaser would have been put on constructive notice of the               
transfer (extinguishment) of Tran’s equity of redemption to               
Citizens via the execution of the memorandum of sale.  If the             
question is answered in the affirmative, that is, if there is             
constructive notice, Tran, cloaked as a bona fide purchaser               
under Section 544(a)(3), cannot avoid the transfer; if answered           
in the negative, that is, in the absence of constructive notice,          
he can.  As explained in more detail below, this Court concludes          

that there is constructive notice in the present case, and                
consequently, that Tran cannot avoid the transfer                         

3 Section 544(a)(3) is the specific “strong-arm” power Tran          
attempts to use to avoid the transfer of the equity of                    
redemption.  The other two powers in 11 U.S.C. § 544(a)(1) and            
11 U.S.C. § 544(a)(2), respectively, are not at issue here.  See          
also Bankruptcy Court Decision 5 (phrasing the legal question as          
whether “a trustee, cloaked with the status of a good faith               
purchaser under § 544(a)(3), [could] avoid the transfer of                
equitable title”).                                                        
(extinguishment) of the equity of redemption.                             
Tran contends that the deed relating to the foreclosure              
auction sale is defective, Appellant’s Br. 2, “flawed and void,”          
and thus unable to give effect to the transfer of Tran’s equity           
of redemption over the Property.  Appellant’s Surreply 2.                 

Tran’s contention rests on his understanding that a defective             
deed lacking an acknowledgment, as he argues is the case here,            
cannot provide constructive notice.  See, e.g., Appellant’s Br.           
6.  He also asserts that Jacobs concedes the defective nature of          
the deed.  See, e.g., Appellant’s Reply 2.  Jacobs, on the other          
hand, submits that there is no need to reach the issue of the             
allegedly defective deed.  See Appellee’s Surreply 3 n.1.  This           
is because, Jacobs contends, the Affidavit of Sale that was               
recorded on September 8, 2022 (and thus prepetition),                     
Appellant’s Br. 2; Appellee’s Br. 5, evidencing the execution of          
a memorandum of sale at the foreclosure auction, provided                 
constructive notice to third parties that Tran’s equity of                

redemption had extinguished.  See, e.g., Appellee’s Br. 6, 10-            
11.  This Court agrees with Jacobs.                                       
Without going into the details of the allegedly defective            
deed,4 it is important to note that this Court already concluded          


4 The Bankruptcy Court did not reach the issue of the                
allegedly defective deed either.  See Bankruptcy Court Decision           
5-6.  It did, however, note that “[a] foreclosure deed was also           
above, see supra Section IV.B.4, that Tran’s equity of                    
redemption extinguished via the execution of a memorandum of              
sale at the conclusion of the foreclosure auction sale.  Thus,            
for Tran to successfully avoid the transfer (extinguishment) of           
his equity of redemption, he must persuade the Court that third           

parties were not put on notice of the conclusion of the auction           
sale.                                                                     
This Court remains unpersuaded by Tran’s focus on the deed,          
because, as the courts of the Commonwealth whose decisions were           
surveyed earlier in this opinion make abundantly clear, the               
prompt delivery of a non-defective deed is not the instrument or          
the process through which one’s equity of redemption is                   
extinguished.  Rather, it is the execution of a memorandum of             
sale that extinguishes said equity.  As such, for purposes of             
extinguishing a debtor’s equity of redemption and ensuring that           
the debtor cannot avoid such extinguishment via Section                   
544(a)(3), it suffices that third parties are put on                      

constructive notice of the due conclusion of a foreclosure                
auction and not of the deed.  See In re Mularski, 565 B.R. 203,           
208 n.2 (Bankr. D. Mass. 2017) (Hoffman, J.) (noting that                 
“prompt compliance” with the Commonwealth’s requirement that an           
Affidavit of Sale be recorded in the registry of deeds following          

recorded concurrently with the Affidavit of Sale that did not             
include the signature page.”  Id. at 3.                                   
a foreclosure sale “would put the world on notice that the                
foreclosure sale had been consummated, so that the failure to             
record the foreclosure deed itself might not present                      
difficulties”); see also Bankruptcy Court Decision 5 (adopting            
the reasoning in In re Mularski);5 Appellee’s Br. 10 (“It was not         

necessary to record a foreclosure deed to provide constructive            
notice of the foreclosure sale because the foreclosure is                 
complete at the time of the auction sale.” (quotations and                


5 Tran takes issue with the Bankruptcy Court’s reliance on           
In re Mularski by arguing that the latter’s statement regarding           
an affidavit of sale sufficing for purposes of putting third              
parties on constructive notice as to the foreclosure sale is              
“speculative dicta.”  Appellant’s Br. 7 (referring to In re               
Mularski’s use of the word “[a]rguably,” 565 B.R. at 208 n.2, as          
a preface to its observation that an affidavit of sale would put          
third parties on notice).  There is nothing barring this Court            
from taking notice of the decisions of other courts, including            
those statements that are more appropriately categorized as               
dicta, in arriving at its own conclusion.  Further, in In re              
Mularski, neither the affidavit of sale nor the foreclosure deed          
was recorded prepetition, 565 B.R. at 208 n.2 (“In this case,             
because none of the foreclosure documents were recorded before            
the filing of the bankruptcy petition, I need not decide what             
documents must be on record to perfect the transfer of an equity          
of redemption vis-à-vis third parties.” (emphasis in original)).          
The present appeal is easily distinguishable from the fact                
pattern in that case, as both the deed, notwithstanding its               
alleged defects, and the Affidavit of Sale were recorded                  
prepetition.  Tran further points to In re Mularski’s partial             
reliance on a case from a sister court in New York with a                 
different mortgage foreclosure regime, id. (citing In re                  
Cerrato, 504 B.R. 23, 33 (Bankr. E.D.N.Y. 2014)).  See                    
Appellant’s Br. 6-7.  Again, there is nothing barring courts,             
especially in the absence of relevant “Massachusetts decisional           
authority,” In re Mularski, 565 B.R. at 207, from looking to              
decisions of other courts.                                                
citations omitted)).                                                      
The recorded Affidavit of Sale, see Answer to Compl. Filed           
by Herbert Jacobs 9-10, does exactly that: it puts third parties          
on notice that the foreclosure auction, whose conclusion upon             
the execution of a memorandum of sale extinguished Tran’s equity          

of redemption, indeed happened.  See, e.g., Chaves v. United              
States Bank, N.A., 335 F. Supp. 3d 100, 107 (D. Mass. 2018)               
(Wolf, J.) (holding that defendants’ “recorded Affidavit of               
Sale establishes a prima facie case that they have complied with          
the statutory requirements for conducting a foreclosure by power          
of sale, including the notice requirements of § 14”); see also            
Fannie Mae v. Hendricks, 463 Mass. 635, 642 (2012) (holding that          
“where the Affidavit of Sale is in the statutory form or meets            
the particular requirements of § 15, a plaintiff has made a               
prima facie case”).                                                       
To be sure, the Commonwealth’s courts have held that all             
that a recorded affidavit of sale does is to make a prima facie,          

not conclusive, case of compliance with the Commonwealth’s                
relevant notice requirements.  See, e.g., Fannie Mae, 463 Mass.           
at 641.  If and when such a prima facie case has been made,               
however, it is “incumbent” upon the mortgagor to “counter with            
his own affidavit or acceptable alternative[.]”  Chaves, 335 F.           
Supp. 3d at 107; Fannie Mae, 463 Mass. at 642.                            
In the present appeal, Tran has not contested the Affidavit          
of Sale evidencing the conclusion of the foreclosure auction via          
a duly executed memorandum of sale.  Appellant’s Reply 2                  
(asserting that Jacobs mistakenly “focusses [sic] on the                  
Affidavit, which is simply wrong”).  Having reviewed the                  
Bankruptcy Docket, this Court observes that the Affidavit of              

Sale contains the seller and the purchaser’s names and their              
signatures, correctly identifies the Property and the purchase            
price, is notarized, notes compliance with the requirement to             
publish notice of the sale in a local newspaper three times, and          
is accompanied by a note of general compliance with the                   
Commonwealth’s applicable notice requirements.  See Answer to             
Compl. Filed by Herbert Jacobs 9.  In the absence of any                  
evidence proffered by Tran that the Affidavit of Sale is                  
defective, the Court concludes that the affidavit’s prepetition           
recording provided constructive notice to bona fide third                 
parties.  See Chaves, 335 F. Supp. 3d at 107 (“Therefore, by              
submitting an Affidavit of Sale in the statutory form defendants          

have demonstrated prima facie compliance with the § 14 notice             
requirements.”).  As such, Tran is unable to avoid the transfer           
of his equity of redemption.                                              
In summary, it is settled that in the Commonwealth a                 
mortgagor’s equity of redemption extinguishes upon the execution          
of a memorandum of sale at the conclusion of a foreclosure                
auction sale.  The courts of the Commonwealth have further held           
that an affidavit regarding such sale that complies with the              
applicable statutory requirements is prima facie evidence that            
such sale occurred, which puts third parties on notice that such          
sale occurred.  Therefore, Tran can neither argue that he still           
retains his equity of redemption on the Property nor that he is           

able to avoid the transfer of such equity by contending that the          
foreclosure deed contains defects.                                        
V.   CONCLUSION                                                           
For the foregoing reasons, this Court AFFIRMS the                    
Bankruptcy Court.  Bankruptcy Docket Nos. 38, 40, 44.                     

SO ORDERED.                                                               

                                   _/s/ William G. Young__           
                                     WILLIAM G. YOUNG                
                                          JUDGE                      
                                          of the                     
                                      UNITED STATES6                 





6 This is how my predecessor, Peleg Sprague (D. Mass. 1841-          
1865), would sign official documents.  Now that I’m a Senior              
District Judge I adopt this format in honor of all the judicial           
colleagues, state and federal, with whom I have had the                   
privilege to serve over the past 45 years.