UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
                  DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                             
___________________________________                                       
                                 )                                      
TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC,                )                                      
CHRISTENSEN FARMS MIDWEST, LLC,    )                                      
THE HANOR COMPANY                  )                                      
OF WISCONSIN, LLC,                 )                                      
NEW FASHION PORK, LLP,             )                                      
EICHELBERGER FARMS, INC.,          )                                      
ALLIED PRODUCERS’ COOPERATIVE,     )                                      
individually and on behalf         )                                      
of their members,                  )                                      
                                 )         CIVIL ACTION                 
                  Plaintiffs,    )         No. 23-11671-WGY             
                                 )                                      
             v.                  )                                      
                                 )                                      
ANDREA JOY CAMPBELL, in her        )                                      
official capacity as Attorney      )                                      
General of Massachusetts,          )                                      
ASHLEY RANDLE, in her official     )                                      
capacity as Massachusetts          )                                      
Commissioner of Agriculture,       )                                      
                                 )                                      
                  Defendants.    )                                      
___________________________________)                                      

YOUNG, D.J.                                   July 22, 2024               

                     MEMORANDUM & ORDER                                 
I.   INTRODUCTION                                                         
   This case is about pork: how it is raised and where it may           
be sold for human consumption.  The Plaintiffs, Triumph Foods,            
LLC (“Triumph”), Christensen Farms Midwest, LLC, The Hanor                
Company of Wisconsin, LLC, New Fashion Pork, LLP, Eichelberger            
Farms, Inc., and Allied Producers’ Cooperative (collectively,             
the “Pork Producers”), seek to stop the enforcement of the                
Massachusetts Prevention of Farm Animal Cruelty Act (“the Act”)           
by suing Andrea Joy Campbell, in her official capacity as                 
Attorney General of Massachusetts, and Ashley Randle, in her              
official capacity as Massachusetts Commissioner of Agriculture            
(collectively, the “Commonwealth”).  Am. Compl., ECF No. 17.              
The Plaintiffs allege that the Federal Meat Inspection Act                

(“FMIA”) preempts the Act’s enforcement.  Id.                             
   Along with pork, this case is about how a state may                  
regulate its own commerce while continuing fully to participate           
in the national economy.  See generally National Pork Producers           
Council v. Ross, 137 Harv. L. Rev. 330 (2023).  The Constitution          
and our federal laws provide a framework for each state to                
follow in regulating certain industries, but, provided they do            
not interfere with that framework, states may still introduce             
and enforce their own laws and regulations.  Today, the industry          
in question is pork; tomorrow, it could be shellfish.  See                
Amicus Br. Iowa, ECF No. 71.  The industry is, to some extent,            
irrelevant, so long as the state’s statutory scheme does not              

conflict with that of the federal government.  “The preemption            
of state laws represents ‘a serious intrusion into state                  
sovereignty.’”  Virginia Uranium, Inc. v. Warren, 587 U.S. 761,           
773 (2019) (quoting Medtronic, Inc. v. Lohr, 518 U.S. 470, 488            
(1996) (plurality opinion)).  As Congress has not preempted the           
state law in question here summary judgment is granted to the             
Commonwealth.                                                             
II.  PROCEDURAL HISTORY                                                   
   The Pork Producers filed their amended complaint on July             
31, 2023.  See Am. Compl.  The amended complaint alleged ten              
causes of action, most arising under the United States                    
Constitution.  See id.  The Pork Producers requested a                    

preliminary injunction, and after a hearing on September 6,               
2023, the Court collapsed the motion with a trial on the merits           
in accordance with Rule 65(a)(1).  See Massachusetts                      
Lobstermen's Ass'n, Inc. v. National Marine Fisheries Serv., No.          
CV 24-10332-WGY, 2024 WL 2194260, at *3 n.5 (D. Mass. Apr. 16,            
2024) (appeal pending).  The Commonwealth then filed a motion to          
dismiss.  Mot. Dismiss, ECF No. 53; see also Mem. Supp. Mot.              
Dismiss Compl., ECF No. 54.  The Court granted the                        
Commonwealth’s motion to dismiss with respect to Counts II-X but          
denied the motion to dismiss with respect to Count I, alleging a          
violation of the Dormant Commerce Clause.  See Elec. Clerk’s              
Notes, ECF No. 66.                                                        

   The Pork Producers then moved for partial summary judgment           
on the remaining Dormant Commerce Clause claim.  Pls.’ Mot.               
Partial Summ. J., ECF No. 87; see also Mem. Reasons Supp. Pls.’           
Mot. Partial Summ. J., ECF No. 88.  In opposition, the                    
Commonwealth requested that summary judgment be entered against           
the Pork Producers pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(f)(1).  See             
Mem. Opp’n Pls.’ Mot. Summ. J. & Req. Summ J., ECF No. 94.  On            
November 14, 2023, the parties agreed to proceed on a case                
stated basis on the remaining claim.                                      
   On December 19, 2023, after oral argument, the Court took            
the matter under advisement.  See Elec. Clerk’s Notes, ECF No.            
117.  On February 5, 2024, the Court entered a memorandum and             

order which severed the provision of the Act (“the                        
slaughterhouse exemption”) that violated the Dormant Commerce             
Clause from the rest of the statute and vacated in part the               
Court’s previous dismissal of Count III in the Pork Producer’s            
amended complaint, which claimed that the Act was preempted by            
the FMIA.  See Memorandum and Order, ECF No. 125.                         
   The Pork Producers now move for summary judgment on the              
ground that the Act, with the slaughterhouse exemption severed,           
is now preempted by the FMIA.  See Pls.’ Mot. Summ. J., ECF No.           
126 (“Pls.’ Mot.”); see also Pl.’s Mem. Reasons Supp. Pls.’ Mot.          
Summ. J., ECF No. 127 (“Mem. Supp. Pls.’ Mot.”).  The                     
Commonwealth cross-moves for summary judgment on the ground that          

the Act is not preempted by the FMIA.  See Defs.’ Mot. Summ. J.,          
ECF No. 136 (“Defs.’ Mot.”); see also Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J.,           
ECF No. 137 (“Mem. Supp. Defs.’ Mot.”).  The parties have fully           
briefed the issues.  Id.; Pls.’ Reply Supp. Pls.’ Mot. Summ. J.           
& Opp. Defs.’ Mot. Summ. J. (“Pls.’ Reply”), ECF No. 158.                 
III.  UNDISPUTED FACTS                                                    
   The Pork Producers are a combination of pig farmers (“the            
Farmer Plaintiffs”) and one pork processor, Triumph.                      
Collectively, the Pork Producers are located outside the state            
of Massachusetts, in Minnesota, Iowa, Nebraska, Illinois, South           

Dakota, Wisconsin, Oklahoma, North Carolina, Missouri, Wyoming,           
and Indiana.  Am. Compl. ¶¶ 12-19.  The Farmer Plaintiffs allege          
that the Act will force them to “convert their farm operations            
to meet Minimum Size Requirements.”  Id. ¶ 56.  Triumph alleges           
that the adjustments it will need to make as a pork processor to          
comply with the Act are “penalties.”  Id. ¶ 58.                           
   A.  The Act                                                          
   In 2016, Massachusetts enacted the Prevention of Farm                
Animal Cruelty Act, Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 129 App., § 1, through            
ballot initiative.  Id. ¶ 25.  The Act’s purpose is to “prevent           
animal cruelty by phasing out extreme methods of farm animal              
confinement, which also threaten the health and safety of                 

Massachusetts consumers, increase the risk of foodborne illness,          
and have negative fiscal impacts on the Commonwealth of                   
Massachusetts.”  Id. § 1-1.  The Act makes it unlawful “for a             
farm owner or operator within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts           
to knowingly cause any covered animal to be confined in a cruel           
manner.”  Id. § 1-5.  The Act defines “confined in a cruel                
manner” as confining a “breeding pig in a manner that prevents            
the animal from lying down, standing up, fully extending the              
animal’s limbs or turning around freely” (“Minimum Size                   
Requirements”).  Id.  The Act also makes it unlawful for a                
“business owner or operator to knowingly engage in the sale               
within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts of any . . . Whole Pork          

Meat that the business owner or operator knows or should know is          
the meat of a covered animal that was confined in a cruel                 
manner, or is the meat of the immediate offspring of a covered            
animal that was confined in a cruel manner.”  Id. § 1-3.  A sale          
is defined in the Act as “a commercial sale by a business that            
sells any item covered by Section 3.”  Id. § 1-5(M).  The                 
definition goes on to state that “[f]or purposes of this                  
section, a sale shall be deemed to occur at the location where            
the buyer takes physical possession of an item covered by                 
Section 3.”  Id.                                                          
   The Attorney General has exclusive authority to enforce the          
provisions of the Act.  Id. § 1-6.  Each violation of the Act is          

punishable by a civil fine up to $1,000 and, in addition, the             
Attorney General may seek injunctive relief to prevent any                
further violations of the Act.  Id.                                       
   B.  The FMIA                                                         
   The FMIA was enacted in 1906 “in light of concerns that              
unhealthy meat products impaired the effective regulation of              
meat and meat food products in interstate or foreign commerce.”           
Pls.' St. Undisputed Material Facts Supp. Pls.’ Mot. Summ. J. ¶           
40, ECF No. 128 (“Pls.’ SOF”) (internal quotation marks and               
brackets omitted).  Under the FMIA, pigs are inspected prior to           
entering a slaughterhouse, while in a slaughterhouse facility,            
and post-slaughter.  Id. ¶¶ 47-49.  The FMIA does not regulate            

pig farmers, only slaughterhouses.  The FMIA contains an express          
preemption clause, which states that “[r]equirements within the           
scope of [the FMIA] with respect to premises, facilities and              
operations of any [FMIA-inspected] establishment . . . which are          
in addition to, or different than those made under this chapter           
may not be imposed.”  Id. ¶ 46; see also 21 U.S.C. § 678.                 
   In 1967, Congress amended the FMIA due to a “need for                
stronger, more effective and more uniform State inspection                
programs . . . [to] provide consumer protection for all                   
citizens, regardless of where their meat originates.”  Pls.’ SOF          
¶ 41.  The FMIA was meant to “[c]larify and broaden [federal]             
authority over meat and meat products capable of use as human             

food,” and “help bring the requirements of Federal and                    
individual State meat inspection programs into closer conformity          
toward eventual elimination of the multiple and conflicting               
requirements presently encountered,” as “[w]ithout such a                 
coordinated network of Federal and State inspection programs,             
the health of the consumer cannot adequately be protected, nor            
can continued confidence in our meat supply be assured.”  Id.             
   The FMIA is enforced by the Food Safety and Inspection               
Service (“FSIS”), an agency of the United States Department of            
Agriculture (“USDA”).  Id. ¶ 43.  For each pig and pork product,          
the FSIS requires all slaughterhouses to keep records of the              
following: bills of sale, invoices, receiving and shipping                

papers, descriptions of all livestock, net weight of all                  
livestock, names and addresses of all buyers, methods of                  
shipment, names and addresses of carriers, and the contact                
information for any previous owner of the livestock, as well as           
serial numbers and identification for each animal.  9 C.F.R. §            
320.1(b).                                                                 
   C.  Triumph’s Business Model and Sales                               
   Triumph, a farmer-owned company headquartered in St.                 
Joseph, Missouri, is a processor and producer of pork products.           
Am. Compl. ¶ 12.  Triumph largely receives its supply of pigs             
from its member-owners, many of whom were its fellow plaintiffs           
in this case (prior to summary judgment entering against them).           

Id.; see Elec. Clerk’s Notes, ECF No. 99.  Pork produced by               
Triumph is sold into Massachusetts as well as throughout the              
country.  Am. Compl. ¶ 117.  In 2022, Triumph processed over              
eleven million pounds of pork meat sold into Massachusetts.               
Joint Mot. Clarification & Exped. Status Conf., Attach. A,                
Partial Stipulation Facts ¶ 4, ECF No. 107-1.  Triumph has made           
efforts to adjust its business model and structure in order to            
comply with the Act.  Am. Compl. ¶ 120.                                   
   Triumph has over 1,000 product codes for its products,               
including for specific grocery stores, brands, pork byproducts,           
and type of pig (“open pen gestation”, “grass-fed”, “premium”,            

etc.).  Defs.’ St. Facts Supp. Defs.’ Mot. Summ. J. ¶¶ 26-31,             
ECF No. 138 (“Defs.’ SOF”).  To differentiate between different           
pigs in order to ensure they are classified with the correct              
product code, Triumph requires its pig farmers to deliver pigs            
at specific times, segregates them from other groups of pigs,             
keeps a count of all pigs in the group, and, after processing,            
maintains them in separate storage prior to shipment.  Id. ¶ 34.          
Triumph estimates it is processing approximately 58,000 pigs per          
month in compliance with the Act, which Triumph estimates to be           
about 700,000 compliant pigs (or 70 million pounds) per year              
available through Triumph.  Id. ¶ 35.                                     
   Due to the Act, Triumph has created a process to                     

differentiate between pork that meets the Act’s requirements and          
pork that does not.  Pls.’ SOF ¶ 62.  Triumph has also                    
implemented new product codes, sorting procedures, and storage            
locations within its facility in order to ensure compliance with          
the Act.  Id. ¶ 63.                                                       
IV.  ANALYSIS                                                             
   A.  Standard of Review                                               
   Summary judgment is required when “there is no genuine               
dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to             
judgment as a matter of law.”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a).  An issue           

of material fact is genuine “if the evidence is such that a               
reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party.”          
Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248 (1986).                
Materiality depends on the substantive law, and only factual              
disputes that might affect the outcome of the suit can preclude           
summary judgment.  Id.  In reviewing the evidence, this Court             
must “draw all reasonable inferences in favor of the nonmoving            
party, and it may not make credibility determinations or weigh            
the evidence.”  Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530            
U.S. 133, 150 (2000).  This Court must also “disregard all                
evidence favorable to the moving party that the jury is not               
required to believe.”  Id. at 151.                                        

   “The [summary judgment pleading standard is] the same                
where, as here, both parties have moved for summary judgment.”            
Bienkowski v. Northeastern Univ., 285 F.3d 138, 140 (1st Cir.             
2002).  The fact that both parties have moved for summary                 
judgment on the same issues, “neither dilutes nor distorts” the           
summary judgment standard of review.  See Hartford Fire Ins. Co.          
v. CNA Ins. Co., 633 F.3d 50, 53 (1st Cir. 2011).  When courts            
are considering cross-motions for summary judgment, they must             
“consider each motion separately, drawing all inferences in               
favor of each non-moving party in turn.”  AJC Int'l, Inc. v.              
Triple–S Propiedad, 790 F.3d 1, 3 (1st Cir. 2015) (quoting D & H          
Therapy Assocs., LLC v. Bos. Mut. Life Ins. Co., 640 F.3d 27, 34          

(1st Cir. 2011)).  “Cross-motions for summary judgment do not             
alter the summary judgment standard, but instead simply ‘require          
[the Court] to determine whether either of the parties deserves           
judgment as a matter of law on the facts that are not                     
disputed.’”  Wells Real Estate Inv. Tr. II, Inc. v. Chardón/Hato          
Rey P’ship, 615 F.3d 45, 51 (1st Cir. 2010) (quoting Adria Int'l          
Grp., Inc. v. Ferré Dev., Inc., 241 F.3d 103, 107 (1st Cir.               
2001)).  The Court must “in each instance [determine] whether             
the moving party has met its burden under Rule 56.”  Dan                  
Barclay, Inc. v. Stewart & Stevenson Servs., Inc., 761 F.Supp.            
194, 197–98 (D. Mass. 1991) (Caffrey, J.).                                
   B.  The Act Is Not Preempted by the FMIA.                            

   The Pork Producers argue that the Act is preempted by                
the FMIA via both express preemption and conflict                         
preemption.  See Mem. Supp. Pl.’s Mot.  These arguments                   
misconstrue the Supreme Court’s holding in National Meat                  
Ass'n v. Harris, the scope of the Act, and the text of the                
FMIA.  National Meat Ass'n v. Harris, 565 U.S. 452 (2012).                
     1. Express Preemption                                              
   In Harris, the Court reviewed whether a California                   
provision (the “California Act”) that regulated slaughterhouses           
within the state was preempted by the FMIA.  Id. at 455.  The             
California Act had three provisions: 1) a provision banning any           

slaughterhouse from buying, selling, receiving “a nonambulatory           
animal”; 2) a provision banning the “process, butcher, or [sale           
of] meat or products of nonambulatory animals for human                   
consumption”; and 3) a provision against “hold[ing] a                     
nonambulatory animal without taking immediate action to humanely          
euthanize the animal.”  See Cal. Penal Code § 599f(a)-(c).  The           
Court ruled that the California Act was expressly preempted by            
the FMIA because the California Act “substitutes a new                    
regulatory regime for the one the FMIA prescribes.”  Harris, 565          
U.S. at 460.  The Court further held that although “the FMIA’s            
preemption clause does not usually foreclose state regulation of          
the commercial sales activities of slaughterhouses,” [the                 

California Act’s] sales ban was “a criminal proscription                  
calculated to help implement and enforce each of the section’s            
other regulations,” and was therefore preempted by the FMIA.              
Id. at 463-64.                                                            
   The Pork Producers argue that the Act in question here               
functions in much the same way; because the Act’s sales ban               
imposes additional conditions for FMIA regulated establishments,          
Triumph argues it “functions as a command to slaughterhouses to           
structure their operations in the exact way the [Act] mandates.”          
Mem. Supp. Pls.’ Mot. 17 (quoting Harris, 565 U.S. at 464).  The          
Act, however, differs from the California Act in Harris in a              
fundamental way: the Act has no provision requiring any action            

by a slaughterhouse other than its sales ban.                             
   In Harris, the Court noted that California “may motivate an          
operational choice without running afoul of the FMIA’s                    
preemption provision.”  565 U.S. at 463.  It was the fact that            
the sales ban functioned “as a command to slaughterhouses to              
structure their operations in the exact way the remainder of              
[the California Act] mandate[d].”  Id. at 464 (emphasis added).           
By contrast, the Act here only bans the sale of noncompliant              
pork meat; it does not regulate how a slaughterhouse operates.            
As the Commonwealth argues, “the practical result of the Act is           
that a slaughterhouse that wishes to sell whole pork meat in              
Massachusetts must be able to identify whether that meat                  

originated from a compliant pig.”  Mem. Supp. Defs.’ Mot. 18.             
Slaughterhouses may still operate in the same way they did                
previously -- noncompliant pork processing is not only allowed,           
but slaughterhouses are not even required to segregate                    
noncompliant pork from compliant pork.  See, e.g., Virginia               
Uranium, 587 U.S. at 790–91 (Ginsburg, J., concurring) (“The              
distinction drawn in National Meat thus supports this                     
conclusion: A state law regulating an upstream activity within            
the State's authority is not preempted simply because a                   
downstream activity falls within a federally occupied field.”).           
   The Pork Producers also argue that Triumph has had to make           
“changes to how pork is physically stored at and shipped from             

Triumph’s facility,” but it is unclear on the record why that             
would be required under the Act -- these changes for storage and          
distribution may make Triumph’s tracking and organization of              
compliant pork easier and more manageable, but they are not               
required under the law.  Pls.’ Reply 15.  As the FSIS already             
requires, a slaughterhouse must be able to identify where its             
pork meat came from.1  See supra, p. 7-8.  Organizing and storing         
the pork to ensure that the Act -- compliant pork is shipped              
together is no different than the storage procedures that                 
Triumph is already following –- it segregates organic, grass-             
fed, or otherwise “specialty” pork.  Though the Act requires              

                                                                        
   1 The Pork Producers raise, for the first time in their              
reply, that the Act imposes on farmers and slaughterhouses a              
recordkeeping requirement, “under the penalty of perjury,” so             
different than those of the FMIA that it must be preempted.               
Pls.’ Reply.  This requirement, for certifications of how pig             
suppliers confine breeding pigs, however, is far outside the              
scope and purpose of the FMIA; again, these records are made in           
order to determine the treatment of the animals prior to                  
slaughter, not to determine whether the animals are fit for               
human consumption.  This requirement therefore sits far outside           
the scope of the FMIA, and consequently, the Pork Producers have          
not met their burden in demonstrating that the requirement is             
preempted.                                                                
changes in operations for pig farmers, which the FMIA does not            
cover, slaughterhouses may continue to operate as they did                
previously -- they are simply only allowed to ship compliant              
pork meat for sale in Massachusetts.2                                     
   Finally, the Pork Producers argue that the Act “[overrides]          

the USDA’s inspection and approval of the [pork] for sale”                
because Massachusetts has independently found that the pork is            
“adulterated, not fit for human consumption.”  Mem. Supp. Pl.’s           
Mot. 14.  The Pork Producers argue that because one of the                
stated purposes of the Act is to protect “the health and safety           
of Massachusetts consumers,” in banning the sale of certain pork          
products, the Act creates additional requirements for the same            
stated purpose as that of the FMIA.  Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 129              
App., § 1-1.  As the Pork Producers also correctly explain,               
however, this Court must “look . . . to the effect of the                 
regulatory scheme.”  Associated Indus. of Mass. v. Snow, 898              
F.2d 274, 279 (1st Cir. 1990).  It is not the stated purpose of           

the state statute, but the operation of that statute, that                
determines whether it is preempted by federal law.  Here,                 
                                                                        
   2 The Pork Producers also argue that the other cases cited           
by the Commonwealth are inapplicable because those cases                  
involved wholesale bans on types of meat, not simply bans on how          
that meat “was produced or processed.”  Pls.’ Reply 8.  The Pork          
Producers, however, have only shown that the ban here affects             
how pork is “produced”, which is a function of the pig farmers,           
and not how pork is “processed”, which is a function of Triumph           
and other slaughterhouses.  The argument, therefore, fails.               
preventing consumption of adulterated products is the purpose of          
the FMIA, but it is not the purpose of the Act.  The Act’s                
purpose is to prevent animal cruelty.  The language otherwise is          
just that -- language -- and in practice, the Act has no effect           
on health and safety in the Commonwealth.                                 

   The Court, therefore, determines that the Act is not                 
expressly preempted by the FMIA.                                          
     2. Conflict Preemption                                             
   The Pork Producers also argue that the Act’s sales ban is            
preempted under principles of conflict preemption because the             
sales ban “conflicts with, and obstructs, the objectives of the           
FMIA.”  Mem. Supp. Pl.’s Mot. 23.  Conflict preemption is                 
triggered “when the state law stands as an obstacle to the                
accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives          
of Congress.”  Weaver’s Cove Energy, LLC v. Rhode Island Coastal          
Res. Mgmt. Council, 589 F.3d 458, 472-73 (1st Cir. 2009).                 
Should a statute have a preemption provision, as the FMIA does,           

a conflict preemption analysis is generally inappropriate. See            
English v. General Elec. Co., 496 U.S. 72, 79 (1990) (conflict            
preemption analysis applies in the “absence of explicit                   
statutory language.”).  A presumption against preemption applies          
generally to such an analysis as well.  See Medicaid & Medicare           
Advantage Prod. Ass'n of P.R., Inc. v. Emanuelli Hernandez, 58            
F.4th 5, 11 (1st Cir. 2023).  The Court here, however, will               
continue to conduct such an analysis.                                     
   A state law is preempted by conflict preemption when “it is          
impossible for a private party to comply with both state and              
federal requirements” or where state law “stands as an obstacle           

to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and              
objectives of Congress.”  English, 496 U.S. at 79 (quoting Hines          
v. Davidowitz, 312 U.S. 52, 67 (1941)).  “What is a sufficient            
obstacle is a matter of judgment, to be informed by examining             
the federal statute as a whole and identifying its purpose and            
intended effects.”  Maine Forest Prod. Council v. Cormier, 51 F.          
4th 1, 6 (1st Cir. 2022) (citing Crosby v. National Foreign               
Trade Council, 530 U.S. 363, 373 (2000)).                                 
   The purpose of the FMIA is “adequately” to “protect” “the            
health of the consumer” through the intended effect of “a                 
uniform framework” of federal and state meat inspection                   
programs.  Pls.’ SOF ¶ 41.  The Act, in contrast, seeks to                

prevent the sale of pork raised in inhumane conditions, without           
concern for whether that meat is safe to eat (in other words, an          
otherwise healthy pork product could be noncompliant with the             
Act, not because it is considered unhealthy, but because the              
policy preferences of the Massachusetts voters demand it not be           
eligible for sale).  There is nothing in the record to indicate           
that since the Act’s enactment, obstacles have occurred in                
ensuring safe and healthy pork in the Massachusetts market                
through the FMIA.                                                         
   Further, as explained above, slaughterhouses can easily              
comply with both federal requirements and the requirements                
imposed by the Act because the Act does not impose any new                

requirements on slaughterhouses within the scope of the FMIA.             
As the Act does not impose any new requirements on                        
slaughterhouses within the scope of the FMIA, it cannot, by               
definition, stand as an obstacle to the accomplishment or                 
execution of Congress’s objectives under the FMIA.                        
   The Pork Producers argue that because there is “pork meat            
product that has passed FMIA inspection and is approved for sale          
by the USDA [that] is now unable to be sold,” the Act conflicts           
with the FMIA.  Pls.’ Reply 19.                                           
   Although the Pork Producers point to instances in the                
record where a farmer, in providing both compliant and non-               
compliant pigs to a processor, erred in denoting pigs as                  

compliant, resulting in pigs that had passed full USDA                    
inspection being withdrawn from the market, such instances do             
not interfere with the objectives of the FMIA.3  If the farmer            
had erred in labeling pigs delivered as “grass-fed”, and such an          

                                                                        
   3 The objective of the FMIA is to ensure safe pork enters            
the market.  The FMIA, however, does not require that all safe            
pork available to the market be able to enter the market.                 
error was discovered after packaging and shipment, the                    
mislabeled pork products would also have been withdrawn from the          
market to prevent misleading customers.  The FMIA’s purpose, to           
protect the health of consumers through uniform meat inspection           
regulations, is in no way precluded by the Act’s recording                

requirements.  The Court, therefore, determines that the Act is           
not preempted by the FMIA via conflict preemption.                        
V.   CONCLUSION                                                         
   After tremendously helpful briefing and oral argument, the           
Court took the parties’ cross motions for summary judgment under          
advisement.  The Court now, after careful consideration,                  
determines that the Act is not preempted by the FMIA, and                 
therefore GRANTS the Commonwealth’s motion for summary judgment,          
ECF No. 136, and DENIES the Pork Producers’ motion for summary            
judgment, ECF No. 126.  Judgment shall enter for the                      
Commonwealth.                                                             
   SO ORDERED.                                                          

                                   _/s/ William G. Young  _             
                                       WILLIAM G. YOUNG                 
                                            JUDGE                       
                                            of the                      
                                        UNITED STATES4                  

                                                                        
   4 This is how my predecessor, Peleg Sprague (D. Mass. 1841-          
1865), would sign official documents.  Now that I’m a Senior              
District Judge I adopt this format in honor of all the judicial           
colleagues, state and federal, with whom I have had the                   
privilege to serve over the past 46 years.

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
                  DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                             
___________________________________                                       
                                 )                                      
TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC,                )                                      
CHRISTENSEN FARMS MIDWEST, LLC,    )                                      
THE HANOR COMPANY,                 )                                      
OF WISCONSIN, LLC,                 )                                      
NEW FASHION PORK, LLP,             )                                      
EICHELBERGER FARMS, INC.,          )                                      
ALLIED PRODUCERS’ COOPERATIVE,     )                                      
individually and on behalf         )                                      
of their members,                  )                                      
                                 )         CIVIL ACTION                 
                  Plaintiffs,    )         No. 23-11671-WGY             
                                 )                                      
             v.                  )                                      
                                 )                                      
ANDREA JOY CAMPBELL, in her        )                                      
official capacity as Attorney      )                                      
General of Massachusetts,          )                                      
ASHLEY RANDLE, in her official     )                                      
capacity as Massachusetts          )                                      
Commissioner of Agriculture,       )                                      
                                 )                                      
                  Defendants.    )                                      
___________________________________)                                      

YOUNG, D.J.                                   February 5, 2024            

                     MEMORANDUM & ORDER                                 

I.   PROCEDURAL HISTORY                                                   
   The Plaintiffs Triumph Foods, LLC, Christensen Farms                 
Midwest, LLC, The Hanor Company of Wisconsin, LLC, New Fashion            
Pork, LLP, Eichelberger Farms, Inc., and Allied Producers’                
Cooperative (collectively, the “Pork Producers”) filed their              
amended complaint, ECF No. 17, on July 31, 2023.  The complaint           
alleged ten causes of action, most under the dormant Commerce             
Clause of the United States Constitution, against the                     
Defendants, the Massachusetts Attorney General and the                    
Massachusetts Commissioner of Agriculture (collectively, “The             
Commonwealth”), due to the Prevention of Farm Animal Cruelty Act          
(“the Act”), Mass. Gen. Laws Ann. ch. 129 App., § 1-1.  See Am.           

Compl., ECF No. 17.  The Pork Producers requested a preliminary           
injunction and, after a motion hearing on September 6, 2023, the          
Court collapsed that motion with trial on the merits in                   
accordance with Rule 65(a)(2).  Electronic Clerk’s Notes, ECF             
No. 42.  The Commonwealth then filed a motion to dismiss.  Mot.           
Dismiss, ECF No. 53; see also Mem. Supp. Mot. Dismiss, ECF No.            
54.  The Court granted the Commonwealth’s motion to dismiss with          
respect to Counts II - X but denied the motion to dismiss with            
respect to Count I, alleging a violation of the dormant Commerce          
Clause.  See Electronic Clerk’s Notes, ECF No. 66.                        
   The Pork Producers then brought a motion for partial                 
summary judgment on Count I.  Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 87; see              

also Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 88.  The parties fully             
briefed the issues and the Commonwealth requested that summary            
judgment be entered against the Pork Producers pursuant to Fed.           
R. Civ. P. 56(f)(1).  See Mem. Opp’n Summ. J., ECF No. 94.  On            
November 14, 2023, the Court heard oral argument on the motion            
for summary judgment.  See Electronic Clerk’s Notes, ECF No. 99.          
The Court entered summary judgment sua sponte, per the request            
of the Commonwealth, against all Plaintiffs aside from Triumph            
Foods, LLC (“Triumph”), id., on all claims under a Pike theory            
of discrimination.  Id.; see Hr’g Tr. 16:1-7,1 ECF No. 103; see           
also Pike v. Bruce Church, Inc., 397 U.S. 137 (1970).                     
   The parties agreed to proceed on a case stated basis as to           

Triumph’s claim under Count I with respect to the sales                   
provision of the Act (the “slaughterhouse exception”).  Id.  The          
parties have briefed the slaughterhouse exception issue of Count          
I on a case stated basis.  Defs.’ Br. Case Stated, ECF No. 109;           
Pl.’s Br. Case Stated, ECF No. 110.                                       
   On December 18, 2023, the Commonwealth filed a motion to             
dismiss for lack of jurisdiction.  See Mot. Dismiss, ECF No.              
114; see also Mem. Supp. Mot. Dismiss, ECF No. 115.  The parties          
have briefed that issue fully.  See Opp’n. Mot. Dismiss, ECF No.          
121.                                                                      
II.  FINDINGS OF FACT                                                     
   In 2016, Massachusetts enacted the Act through ballot                

initiative.  Am. Compl. ¶ 25.  The Act’s purpose is to “prevent           
animal cruelty by phasing out extreme methods of farm animal              
confinement, which also threaten the health and safety of                 
                                                                        
1 PLAINTIFFS’ COUNSEL (Mr. Raupp): With respect to the claims             
under Pike vs. Bruce Church, which I don’t think were moved on,           
certainly not by us -                                                     
THE COURT: Well theirs was an outright [] opposition, and I             
think they’re properly before me, and in any event I reject it            
[i.e., the argument based on Pike].                                       
Massachusetts consumers, increase the risk of foodborne illness,          
and have negative fiscal impacts on the Commonwealth of                   
Massachusetts.”  Mass. Gen. Laws Ann. ch. 129 App., § 1-1.  The           
Act makes it unlawful “for a farm owner or operator within the            
Commonwealth of Massachusetts to knowingly cause any covered              

animal to be confined in a cruel manner.”  Id. § 1-2.  The Act            
defines “confined in a cruel manner” as confining a “breeding             
pig in a manner that prevents the animal from lying down,                 
standing up, fully extending the animal’s limbs or turning                
around freely” (“Minimum Size Requirements”).  Id. § 1-5.  The            
Act also makes it unlawful for a “business owner or operator to           
knowingly engage in the sale within the Commonwealth of                   
Massachusetts of any . . . [w]hole pork meat that the business            
owner or operator knows or should know is the meat of a covered           
animal that was confined in a cruel manner, or is the meat of             
the immediate offspring of a covered animal that was confined in          
a cruel manner.”  Id. § 1-3.  A sale is defined in the Act as “a          

commercial sale by a business that sells any item covered by              
section 3 [of the Act],” but does not include “any sale                   
undertaken at an establishment at which inspection is provided            
under the Federal Meat Inspection Act.”  Id. § 1-5(M).  The               
definition goes on to state that “for purposes of this section,           
a ‘sale’ shall be deemed to occur at the location where the               
buyer takes physical possession of an item covered by . . .               
section 3 [of the Act].”  Id.                                             
   The Attorney General has exclusive authority to enforce the          
provisions of the Act.  Id. § 1-6.  Each violation of the Act is          
punishable by a civil fine up to $1,000, and in addition, the             

Attorney General may seek injunctive relief to prevent any                
further violations of the Act.  Id.                                       
   The Pork Producers here are a combination of pig farmers             
(“the Farmer Plaintiffs”) and one pork processor, Triumph.                
Collectively, the Pork Producers are located outside the                  
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, in Minnesota, Iowa, Nebraska,              
Illinois, South Dakota, Wisconsin, Oklahoma, North Carolina,              
Missouri, Wyoming, and Indiana.  Am. Compl. ¶¶ 12-19.  The                
Farmer Plaintiffs allege that the Act will force them to                  
“convert their farm operations to meet Minimum Size                       
Requirements.”  Id. ¶ 56.  Triumph alleges that the adjustments           
it will need to make as a pork processor in order to comply with          

the Act are “penalties.”  Id. ¶ 58.                                       
     a. Triumph’s Business Model and Sales                              
   Triumph, a farmer-owned company headquartered in St.                 
Joseph, Missouri, is a processor and producer of pork products.           
Id. ¶ 12.  Triumph largely receives its supply of pigs from its           
member-owners, many of whom were its fellow plaintiffs in this            
case (prior to summary judgment entering against them).  Id.;             
see Electronic Clerk’s Notes, ECF No. 99.  Pork produced by               
Triumph is sold into Massachusetts as well as throughout the              
country.  Am. Compl. ¶ 117.  In 2022, Triumph processed over              
eleven million pounds of pork meat sold into Massachusetts.               
Joint Mot. Clarification Expedited Status Conf., Attach. A,               

Partial Stipulation of Facts ¶ 4, ECF No. 107-1.  Triumph has             
made efforts to adjust its business model and structure in order          
to comply with the Act.  Am. Compl. ¶ 120.                                
   Triumph receives its orders for pork products through what           
it refers to as its “exclusive pork marketer,” Seaboard                   
Corporation, Seaboard Foods, LLC, and Seaboard Foods of                   
Missouri, Inc. (“Seaboard” or “SBF”).  Id. ¶ 99.  Triumph and             
Seaboard’s relationship is governed by a contract between the             
two (“the Marketing Agreement”) which states that “[Triumph]              
shall produce pork products at the TF Plant and that [Seaboard]           
shall purchase, market and sell such products pursuant to this            
Agreement.”2  Mem. Supp. Mot. Dismiss, Declaration, Ex. A,                

Marketing Agreement § 2.01, ECF No. 115-2; Mem. Supp. Mot.                
Dismiss 3.  The Marketing Agreement further states that “SBF              
shall have the exclusive right to, and shall be obligated to,             
market and sell on behalf of TF all TF Plant Products.”  Mem.             
Supp. Mot. Dismiss, Declaration, Ex. A, Marketing Agreement §             
                                                                        
   2 “TF Plant” refers to Triumph’s pork processing plant.              
“SBF” refers to Seaboard, and “TF” refers to Triumph.                     
6.01(a).  “SBF shall use its commercially reasonable efforts              
(taking into account customer needs and requirements) to                  
schedule, market, and sell to customers all of the TF Plant               
Products.”  Id.  Finally, the Marketing Agreement states that             
Triumph agrees to produce “pork products that conform to the              

relevant quality standards and specifications made available by           
SBF to TF (the “Quality Standards”) . . . , as amended from time          
to time.”  Id. § 7.02(a).  “TF shall be solely responsible and            
liable for any Losses arising out of the production and sale of           
products produced at the TF Plant that do not meet the Quality            
Standards.”  Id. § 7.02(b).  “TF Plant Products that do not, in           
the Reasonable Good Faith Determination of SBF, meet the                  
applicable Quality Standards (“Non-Conforming Products”) shall            
be marketed and sold to customers by SBF as it deems appropriate          
in its sole discretion.”  Id. § 7.02(c).                                  
     b. The Act’s FMIA Exception (“Slaughterhouse Exception”)           
   A processing facility is inspected under the Federal Meat            

Inspection Act (“FMIA”) when the United States Department of              
Agriculture Food Safety and Inspection Service examines the               
product, facilities, and records of such pork processing plant.           
See Am. Compl. ¶¶ 76-86.  Triumph is an FMIA-inspected facility.          
See Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J. 12.  There are three pork                    
processing facilities that are FMIA-inspected within the                  
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.  See Pl.’s Br. Case Stated 3.              
Outside Massachusetts, there are 101 other FMIA-inspected                 
facilities that package and distribute such products for sale.            
See id.                                                                   
    As stated above, see p.4, supra, the Act here provides an           
exemption from its requirements for pork products when those              

products are sold on the premises of an FMIA-inspected facility.          
   The exemption only occurs for the sale at the inspected              
facility.  If, for instance, a Massachusetts FMIA-inspected pork          
processer sold non-compliant pork on its premises to a grocery            
store, that sale would be exempt; however, the store’s attempts           
to then sell that non-compliant pork in-store, off the premises           
of the FMIA-inspected facility, would be covered under the Act.           
Were that same pork processor to sell directly to the consumer            
at its facility, however, whether a family purchasing pork for            
dinner or a hospital chain purchasing pork to be served, not              
sold, to hundreds of patients, there would be no further sale of          
the pork after the sale on the facility’s premises, and the               

noncompliant pork sale would therefore be entirely exempt from            
the Act.                                                                  
III.  ANALYSIS                                                            
   A.  The Commonwealth’s Motion to Dismiss                             
   The Commonwealth, in its motion to dismiss, argues that              
because Seaboard, not Triumph, markets and sells Triumph pork             
product into Massachusetts, Triumph “has not substantiated harm           
to Triumph causally connected” to the Act.  Mem. Supp. Mot.               
Dismiss 1-2 (emphasis in original).  This is a distinction                
without a difference, however, and the Commonwealth’s motion to           
dismiss is denied.                                                        
     1. Standard of Review                                              

   When evaluating a motion to dismiss pursuant to Federal              
Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1), granting such a motion “is              
appropriate only when the facts alleged in the complaint, taken           
as true, do not justify the exercise of subject matter                    
jurisdiction.”  Muniz-Rivera v. United States, 326 F.3d 8, 11             
(1st Cir. 2003); see also MSP Recovery Claims Series 44, LLC v.           
Bunker Hill Ins. Co., No. CV 22-11681-WGY, 2023 WL 4744739, at            
*3 (D. Mass. July 25, 2023).  “When a district court considers a          
Rule 12(b)(1) motion, it must credit the plaintiff's well-pled            
factual allegations and draw all reasonable inferences in the             
plaintiff's favor.”  Merlonghi v. United States, 620 F.3d 50, 54          
(1st Cir. 2010).  “In addition, the court may consider whatever           

evidence has been submitted, such as the depositions and                  
exhibits submitted in this case.”  Aversa v. United States, 99            
F.3d 1200, 1210 (1st Cir. 1996).  “While the court generally may          
not consider materials outside the pleadings on a Rule 12(b)(6)           
motion, it may consider such materials on a Rule 12(b)(1)                 
motion.”  Gonzalez v. United States, 284 F.3d 281, 288 (1st Cir.          
2002), as corrected (May 8, 2002).                                        
     2. Standing under Article III                                      
   “Article III confines the federal judicial power to the              
resolution of ‘Cases’ and ‘Controversies.’ For there to be a              
case or controversy under Article III, the plaintiff must have a          
‘personal stake’ in the case -- in other words, standing.”                

TransUnion LLC v. Ramirez, 594 U.S. 413, 423 (2021).  “[T]o               
establish standing, a plaintiff must show (i) that he suffered            
an injury in fact that is concrete, particularized, and actual            
or imminent; (ii) that the injury was likely caused by the                
defendant; and (iii) that the injury would likely be redressed            
by judicial relief.” Id. (citing Lujan v. Defs. of Wildlife, 504          
U.S. 555, 560-61 (1992)).                                                 
   The Commonwealth characterizes Triumph’s relationship with           
Seaboard to that of a buyer and seller.  As the Commonwealth              
describes it, Triumph sells its pork products to Seaboard, and            
Seaboard then, as now-owner of these products, markets and sells          
them into Massachusetts.  Mem. Supp. Mot. Dismiss 6-7.  Triumph           

disputes this characterization, however, instead describing               
Seaboard as a contractor Triumph engages to market its products.          
See Opp’n. Mot. Dismiss 10.  Drawing every reasonable inference           
in favor of Triumph as the plaintiff, the contractual                     
relationship between Seaboard and Triumph does not prevent                
Triumph from suffering injury under the Act.  Triumph’s pork              
products can only be sold into Massachusetts when they are                
compliant with the Act; who markets the products and creates              
relationships with customers does not change that fact.                   
   In order to produce compliant pork, Triumph must (and in             
fact, has begun to) restructure its processing facility and               
procedures, segregating pork that meets the requirements of the           

Act.  See Am. Compl. ¶ 89.  Without compliant pork, Triumph is            
unable to sell its products into Massachusetts at all.  These             
are both concrete, particularized injuries to Triumph.  See,              
e.g., Gustavsen v. Alcon Labs., Inc., 903 F.3d 1, 8 (1st Cir.             
2018) (“[A]ctual economic loss . . . is the prototypical                  
concrete harm.”).                                                         
   This injury to Triumph is also imminent and actual economic          
harm.  See Lujan, 504 U.S. at 555.  The Commonwealth argues that          
Seaboard is required “to sell all of Triumph’s product.”  Mem.            
Supp. Mot. Dismiss 8 (emphasis in original).  With this claim,            
however, the Commonwealth misreads the Marketing Agreement.               
Seaboard is only required to sell all of Triumph’s product that           

meets the Quality Standards set forth by Seaboard.  Product that          
fails to meet these Quality Standards is only sold at Seaboard’s          
discretion, and Triumph is responsible for any loss suffered due          
to the sale or failure to sell such products.  Seaboard designs           
its Quality Standards based on the needs of its consumers;                
consumers in Massachusetts likely have more stringent                     
requirements due to the Act.  Triumph, therefore, must produce            
pork compliant with the Act in order to make its sales.                   
   Triumph has standing to challenge the Act.  The                      
Commonwealth’s motion to dismiss is denied.                               
   B.  The Pork Producers’ Claims under Pike                            

   Triumph and its co-plaintiffs have attempted to reserve              
argument of their claims under Pike.  See Pike, 397 U.S. at 142.          
Under this argument, the Pork Producers argue that “the burdens           
on interstate commerce outweigh the putative local benefits of            
the statute.”  See Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J. v.  The Court                 
entered summary judgment against this claim at oral argument;             
the Pork Producers, however, continue to raise it.  The claim is          
foreclosed by the recent Supreme Court decision in National Pork          
Producers Council v. Ross, 598 U.S. 356, 371 (2023), and the              
Court therefore entered summary judgment against the Pork                 
Producers on this argument.  In Ross, two organizations of pork           
producers filed suit on behalf of their members to challenge              

Proposition 12, a California state statute that is nearly                 
identical to the Act.  Id. at 367.  The Supreme Court ruled that          
“harm to some producers’ favored methods of operation” did not            
rise to a “substantial harm to interstate commerce,” and that             
“increased production expenses” cannot be compared by a court to          
“noneconomic” state benefits.  Id. at 385-87 (internal quotation          
marks omitted); id. at 380-81.  Further, the Court explained,             
“judges often are ‘not institutionally suited to draw reliable            
conclusions of the kind that would be necessary . . . to satisfy          
[the] Pike’ test as petitioners conceive it.”  Id. at 380                 
(quoting Department of Revenue of Kentucky v. Davis, 553 U.S.             
328, 353 (2008)).  Triumph apparently wants the Court to attempt          

to apply the Pike balancing test to the facts of its case.  As            
the Supreme Court notes, however, “[t]he competing goods are              
incommensurable. . . . In a functioning democracy, policy                 
choices like these usually belong to the people and their                 
elected representatives.”  Id. at 382.                                    
   “[C]ourts should not be in a position to choose between              
different substantive moral positions based on an inchoate                
balancing test.  Instead, the question should be whether the              
state has a genuine and well-founded conscience concern                   
underlying its law.”  Note, The Dormant Commerce Clause and               
Moral Complicity in a National Marketplace, 137 Harv. L. Rev.             
980, 1001 (2024) (“The Dormant Commerce Clause and Moral                  

Complicity”).  As the Act here is the result of Massachusetts             
citizens petition process, see Sec’y of the Commonwealth of               
Mass., Information for Voters, Massachusetts 2016 Ballot, 8–11            
(2016),3 these “social norms . . . have won out in the political          
process of [Massachusetts].”  The Dormant Commerce Clause and             
                                                                        
   3 https://www.sec.state.ma.us/divisions/elections/download/          
information-for-voters/IFV_2016-English.pdf.                              
Moral Complicity, supra, at 1000-01.  Accordingly, this Court             
declines to engage in Pike balancing and rejects the Pork                 
Producers’ argument.                                                      
   The Pork Producers complain that summary judgment should             
not have entered against them on this point as the Court gave             

inadequate warning of that result.  See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(f)             
(“After giving notice and a reasonable time to respond, the               
court may (1) grant summary judgment for a nonmovant . . . .”).           
The point is of no practical moment (as the Court sought to               
explain during a busy motion session).  The legal issue had been          
fully briefed and the Court’s resolution obviated the need for            
evidence.                                                                 
   C.  Constitutionality of the “Slaughterhouse Exception”              
   Finally, Triumph and the Commonwealth proceeded on a case            
stated basis regarding Triumph’s last claim, the so-called                
slaughterhouse exception.                                                 
     1. Standard of Review                                              

   “In a case stated, the parties waive trial and present the           
case to the court on the undisputed facts in the pre-trial                
record.”  Sánchez-Rodríguez v. AT&T Mobility P.R., Inc., 673              
F.3d 1, 10-11 (1st Cir. 2012) (quotation and citation omitted).           
“‘Case-stated’ resolution is appropriate ‘when the basic dispute          
between the parties concerns only the factual inferences that             
one might draw from the more basic facts to which the parties             
have agreed, and where neither party has sought to introduce              
additional factual evidence or asked to present witnesses.’”              
Id. at 11 (quoting United Paperworkers Int’l Union, Local 14 v.           
International Paper Co., 64 F.3d 28, 31 (1st Cir. 1995)).  In a           
case stated procedure, “the Court approaches the issues as a              

neutral adjudicator and is entitled to ‘engage in a certain               
amount of factfinding, including the drawing of inferences.’”  A          
& W Maint., Inc. v. First Mercury Ins. Co., 91 F. Supp. 3d 113,           
118 (D. Mass. 2015) (citation omitted).                                   
     2. Analysis                                                        
   The Act defines “sale” as: “a commercial sale by a business          
that sells any item covered by section 3 [of the Act]; provided,          
however, that ‘sale’ shall not include any sale undertaken at an          
establishment at which inspection is provided under the Federal           
Meat Inspection Act.”  Mass. Gen. Laws Ann. ch. 129 App., § 1-5.          
The Act provides further that “for purposes of this section, a            
‘sale’ shall be deemed to occur at the location where the buyer           

takes physical possession of an item covered by said section 3.”          
Id.  Sales covered under the Act must occur within the                    
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.  Id. § 1-3.  The Act therefore             
exempts sales “undertaken” at federally inspected establishments          
within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, so long as the “buyer           
takes physical possession” of the covered items while on the              
premises of the inspected establishment.                                  
   Triumph alleges that as an out-of-state pork processor, it           
cannot take advantage of this exemption, even though it operates          
entirely federally inspected facilities, because it ships its             

product into the Commonwealth from out-of-state and, therefore,           
its buyers do not “take physical possession” of its product               
while at its facilities.  See Am. Compl. ¶¶ 232-37.  Meanwhile,           
the federally inspected pork processors in Massachusetts could            
operate within this exception.  Id.  For instance, “a large end-          
user of pork in Massachusetts -- a hospital system, the state             
prison system, a large school district, etc. -- who has for               
decades been buying and taking shipment of millions of dollars            
of pork each year,” could now purchase and take possession of             
cheaper, noncompliant pork on the premises of an in-state                 
facility.  Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J. 12, ECF No. 88.  In                   
contrast, Triumph would have no way to provide that same                  

customer with its noncompliant pork, because it does not have an          
in-state, federally inspected facility.                                   
   The Commonwealth does not dispute Triumph’s analysis of the          
regulation’s exemption.  See Mem. Supp. Mot. Dismiss 10.                  
Instead, it argues that this “limited exception . . . does not            
evince an unconstitutional aim to advantage in-state                      
businesses,” id., and that “the law operates to give in-state             
and out-of-state slaughterhouses the same access to                       
Massachusetts consumers.”  Defs.’ Br. Case Stated 8.  It is true          
that the Commonwealth may not have had a discriminatory purpose           
or intent in legislating this exception.                                  
    The dormant Commerce Clause, however, also asks the Court           

to decide whether the Act results in a discriminatory effect.             
“A state law is discriminatory in effect when, in practice, it            
affects similarly situated entities in a market by imposing               
disproportionate burdens on out-of-state interests and                    
conferring advantages upon in-state interests.”  Family                   
Winemakers of Cal. v. Jenkins, 592 F.3d 1, 10 (1st Cir. 2010)             
(citing Oregon Waste Sys., Inc. v. Department of Env’t Quality            
of State of Or., 511 U.S. 93, 99 (1994)).  “If the effect of a            
state regulation is to cause local goods to constitute a larger           
share, and goods with an out-of-state source to constitute a              
smaller share, of the total sales in the market . . . [,] the             
regulation may have a discriminatory effect on interstate                 

commerce.”  Exxon Corp. v. Governor of Maryland, 437 U.S. 117,            
126 n.16 (1978) (citing Hunt v. Washington State Apple Advert.            
Comm’n, 432 U.S. 333, 347 (1977); Dean Milk Co. v. City of                
Madison, Wis., 340 U.S. 349, 352 (1951)).                                 
   Triumph alleges that, under the Act, in-state processors             
could “create a monopoly for pork processing because they can             
accept all meat-- regardless of whether the meat complies with            
the Act and the Regulations-- while out-of-state processors               
cannot.”  Am. Compl. ¶ 237.  The Commonwealth counters only that          
this is “pure speculation,” and that in-state slaughterhouses             
could not “accommodate that sudden skyrocketing demand.”  Mem.            
Supp. Mot. Dismiss 10; Defs.’ Br. Case Stated 10.                         

   The slaughterhouse exception has a discriminatory effect.            
The only way Triumph would be able to take advantage of the               
slaughterhouse exception would be to open its own federally               
inspected facility within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,              
which the Supreme Court has held violates the Commerce Clause.            
See Granholm v. Heald, 544 U.S. 460, 475 (2005).  Instead,                
Triumph and other out-of-state pork processors must face higher           
costs to sell pork into Massachusetts than those of their                 
counterparts in Massachusetts, similar to the issue in Hunt.              
See Hunt, 432 U.S. at 351 (“North Carolina apple producers,               
unlike their Washington competitors, were not forced to alter             
their marketing practices in order to comply with the statute. .          

. . Obviously, the increased costs imposed by the statute would           
tend to shield the local apple industry from the competition of           
Washington apple growers . . . .”).                                       
   As the slaughterhouse exception is discriminatory, it “is            
virtually per se invalid . . . and will survive only if it                
advances a legitimate local purpose that cannot be adequately             
served by reasonable nondiscriminatory alternatives.”  Jenkins,           
592 F.3d at 5 (citing Davis, 553 U.S. at 338).  The Commonwealth          
fails to demonstrate that the provision advances a legitimate             
local purpose.  The Court takes no position on whether the Act            
itself serves a legitimate local purpose, see Ross, 598 U.S. at           
382,4 but the slaughterhouse exception itself does not appear to          

meet the Act’s purported local purpose, as it does not prevent            
noncompliant pork meat from sale in the Commonwealth of                   
Massachusetts.  The Court, therefore, rules that the                      
slaughterhouse exception violates the dormant Commerce Clause             
because it discriminates against out-of-state commerce.                   
   D.  Severability                                                     
   Although the slaughterhouse exception violates the dormant           
Commerce Clause, it does not render the entire Act                        
unconstitutional; instead, the provision may be severed from the          
rest of the Act.  Severability is governed by state law.  See             
Schwann v. FedEx Ground Package Sys., 813 F.3d 429, 440 (1st              
Cir. 2016).  In Massachusetts, there is a “a well-established             

judicial preference in favor of severability and a recognition            
that ‘the Legislature has announced its own preference in favor           
of severability’ as well.”  Id. (quoting Peterson v. Comm'r of            
Revenue, 444 Mass. 128, 138 (2005)); see Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 4,           
                                                                        
   4 The Commonwealth argues that the local purpose of the Act          
is to “promot[e] animal welfare and remov[e] inhumane products            
and their negative effects from its markets.”  Defs.’ Br. Case            
Stated 10.                                                                
§ 6, Eleventh (setting forth statutory rule of construction that          
“the provisions of any statute shall be deemed severable, and if          
any part of any statute shall be adjudged unconstitutional or             
invalid, such judgment shall not affect other valid parts                 
thereof[]”).                                                              
   The question of severability turns on legislative intent.5           

As the Act was passed by popular vote, the Court therefore must           
decide whether Massachusetts voters “would have enacted the               
particular bill without the [invalid] provision, or whether, in           
the absence of the [invalid] provision, the [voters] would have           
preferred that the bill have no effect at all.”  Mass. Gen. Laws          
ch. 4, § 6 (quoting Peterson, 444 Mass. at 138).  “Severability           
entails a two-step examination in which [the court]                       
determine[s], first, whether the invalid portion of the statute           
is ‘capable of separation’ and, second, whether ‘upholding the            
statute as severed would frustrate the legislative purpose.’”             




                                                                        
   5 Notably, the Act here contains a severability clause,              
Mass. Gen. Laws Ann. ch. 129 App., § 1-9, indicating the voters’          
intent to save any portion of the Act that could be upheld in             
the case of a constitutional challenge.  See Opinion of the               
Justices, 330 Mass. 713, 726 (1953) (“Where the statute contains          
a severability clause . . . , this is a declaration by the                
Legislature that it intends to have the principle of                      
severability invoked wherever possible.”).                                
K.J. v. Superintendent of Bridgewater State Hosp., 488 Mass.              
362, 373 (2021) (citation omitted).                                       
   The slaughterhouse exception is “capable of separation”              
from the rest of the statute.  A statute is “capable of                   
separation” when the “severed [portion] is not so connected with          

and dependent upon other clauses of the act as to constitute an           
essential factor of the whole.”  Id. at 374-75 (internal                  
quotation marks omitted).  The provision here is a discrete               
clause and, were it severed, the Act can still function as                
intended.                                                                 
   Second, the statute as severed would not frustrate the               
legislative purpose of the Act.  In fact, were the                        
slaughterhouse exception severed, the Act would only become               
enforceable in more locations.  If anything, therefore, severing          
the slaughterhouse exception from the Act only serves to bolster          
its purpose.                                                              
   E.  Preemption under the Federal Meat Inspection Act                 

   Triumph argues that the slaughterhouse exception cannot be           
severed from the Act since “absent the exception, the Act is              
unquestionably preempted by the FMIA.”  Pl.’s Br. Case Stated             
13.  This Court, however, has a number of questions before                
reaching that conclusion.  Indeed, having declared the                    
slaughterhouse exemption unconstitutional, it necessarily must            
revisit its dismissal of the Pork Producers’ claim that the Act,          
as originally drafted, was preempted by the FMIA.  Am. Compl.,            
Count III, ¶ 200.  The Court thus vacates that dismissal and              
grants the Pork Producers 30 days from the date hereof to move            
for summary judgment on the ground that the Act –- with the               
slaughterhouse exemption severed –- is now preempted by the               

FMIA.                                                                     
IV.  CONCLUSION                                                         
   The Commonwealth’s motion to dismiss, ECF No. 114, is                
DENIED.  The Court concludes that the slaughterhouse exemption            
violates the dormant Commerce Clause, and orders that provision           
SEVERED from the rest of the Act.                                         
     The Court entered summary judgment against all Plaintiffs          
on all counts and claims save for a dormant Commerce Clause               
claim regarding the slaughterhouse exemption of the Act.  See             
Electronic Clerk’s Notes, ECF No. 99.                                     
   That order must now be VACATED in part to allow the Court            
to consider whether the Act –- with the slaughterhouse exemption          

severed –- is now preempted by the FMIA.                                  
   SO ORDERED.                                                          
                                      _/s/ William G. Young_            
                                       WILLIAM G. YOUNG                 
                                            JUDGE                       
                                            of the                      
                                        UNITED STATES6                  


















                                                                        
   6 This is how my predecessor, Peleg Sprague (D. Mass. 1841-          
1865), would sign official documents.  Now that I’m a Senior              
District Judge I adopt this format in honor of all the judicial           
colleagues, state and federal, with whom I have had the                   
privilege to serve over the past 45 years.