UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
              DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                              

_______________________________________                                   
                           )                                         
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,       )                                         
                           )                                         
     Plaintiff,            )                                         
                           )       Civil Action No.                  
v.                         )       20-11217-FDS                      
                           )                                         
REGENERON PHARMACEUTICALS,      )                                         
INC.,                           )                                         
                           )                                         
     Defendant.            )                                         
_______________________________________)                                  


 ORDER ON THE GOVERNMENT’S MOTION FOR LEAVE TO FILE                  
    A SECOND MOTION FOR PARTIAL SUMMARY JUDGMENT                     
      AND TO REOPEN DISCOVERY ON A LIMITED BASIS                     
SAYLOR, J.                                                                
This is a case alleging violations of the Anti-Kickback Statute (“AKS”), 42 U.S.C. 
§ 1320a-7b, and False Claims Act (“FCA”), 31 U.S.C. §§ 3729 et seq., by a pharmaceutical 
company.  The United States has brought suit against Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., the 
manufacturer of a drug named Eylea, alleging that Regeneron improperly funneled millions of 
dollars to the Chronic Disease Fund (“CDF”)—a purportedly independent charitable 
foundation—to subsidize patient copays for Eylea.                         
According to the government, the purpose of the payments was to induce physicians to 
increase prescriptions of the drug at the expense of the Medicare Part B program.  Among other 
things, the government asserts that the contributions to the foundation were not motivated by a 
charitable purpose; instead, Regeneron employees solicited and received Eylea-specific data 
from CDF and improperly used that data to determine the specific amounts Regeneron would 
contribute, and their purpose in doing so, according to the government, was to increase sales of 
Eylea.  The amended complaint alleges that Regeneron’s actions violated the AKS and caused 
the submission of false claims for payment to Medicare.                   
For its part, Regeneron contends that it donated to a bona fide, independent charity in a 
manner that complied with the government’s own regulatory guidance.  It further asserts that its 

donations did not result in or cause any false claims because it was not the only donor for a 
significant portion of the relevant period; CDF awarded assistance on a first-come, first-served 
basis without regard to whether patients used Eylea or another FDA-approved treatment; CDF 
had sufficient funds to cover all copay support provided to Eylea patients in 2013 and 2014 
without any donations from Regeneron in each respective year; and a majority of Eylea patients 
in 2013 were allocated funds from CDF before Regeneron made a single donation. 
Following the First Circuit’s decision on an interlocutory appeal, the government has 
moved for leave to file a second motion for partial summary judgment on the issues of falsity, 
materiality, and causation under a “false certification” theory of FCA violation.  The government 
has also requested that discovery be reopened on a limited basis to allow it to produce evidence 

related to those issues.  For the following reasons, the government’s motions will be granted. 
I.   Background                                                           
A.   Statutory Framework                                             
The False Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. §§ 3729-33, imposes civil liability for anyone who 
“knowingly presents, or causes to be presented, a false or fraudulent claim for payment or 
approval” or “knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made or used, a false record or statement 
material to a false or fraudulent claim.”  31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(A), (a)(1)(B).  A “claim” is “any 
request or demand . . . for money or property” presented to an officer, employee, or agent of the 
United States.  31 U.S.C. § 3729(b)(2).                                   
The Anti-Kickback Statute, 42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b, states that “[w]hoever knowingly and 
willfully offers or pays any remuneration (including any kickback, bribe, or rebate) directly or 
indirectly, overtly or covertly, in cash or in kind to any person to induce such person . . . to 
purchase . . . or recommend purchasing . . . any good, facility, service, or item for which 
payment may be made in whole or in part under a Federal health care program” shall be guilty of 

a felony.  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(b)(2).                                    
In 2010, Congress amended the AKS to provide that any Medicare claim “that includes 
items or services resulting from a violation of [the AKS] constitutes a false or fraudulent claim 
for purposes of [the FCA].”  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(g); Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act, Pub. L. 111-148, 124 Stat. 119 (2010).  In other words, an “AKS violation that results in a 
federal health care payment is a per se false claim under the FCA.”  Guilfoile v. Shields, 913 F.3d 
178, 190 (1st Cir. 2019) (quoting United States ex rel. Lutz v. United States, 853 F.3d 131, 135 
(4th Cir. 2017)).                                                         
Two theories of FCA liability based on violation of the AKS emerge from the foregoing 
framework:  the “false certification” theory and the “2010 amendment” theory.  “[U]nder the 

false-certification theory, FCA liability lies when a defendant falsely represents AKS compliance 
on a federal agency form.”  United States v. Regeneron Pharms., Inc., 128 F.4th 324, 334 (1st 
Cir. 2025).  Under that theory, the government must also “show that the defendant’s 
misrepresentation of AKS compliance was material to the government’s payment decision.”  Id.  
On the other hand, “the 2010 amendment does not require any representation—implied or 
express—of AKS compliance.”  Id.  Instead, under the 2010 amendment, it is “the AKS violation 
itself that renders the claim false.”  Id. at 333.  However, under that theory—in contrast to false 
certification—“the government must prove that the AKS violation was the but-for cause of the 
false claim” submitted to the government.  Id. at 328.  That is, “if the government can show that 
the illicit kickback was a but-for cause of the submitted claim, then the claim is ‘per se false’ 
[under the 2010 amendment to the AKS] even absent a false certification of AKS compliance.”  
Id. at 335.                                                               
B.   Procedural Background                                           
In its December 4, 2020 ruling on defendant’s motion to dismiss, following reasoning 

from the Third Circuit in United States ex rel. Greenfield v. Medco Health Sols., Inc., 880 F.3d 
89, 96 (3d Cir. 2018), this Court held that the 2010 amendment did not require “‘proof that the 
underlying medical care would not have been provided but for a kickback.’”  (ECF No. 32 at 
22-23 (quoting Greenfield, 880 F.3d at 96)).                              
In 2023, the parties filed cross-motions for summary judgment.  In the time between the 
Court’s ruling on defendant’s motion to dismiss and the parties’ filing of motions for summary 
judgment, the Sixth and Eighth Circuits issued opinions addressing the meaning of the term 
“resulting from a violation” in the 2010 amendment.  Informed by that recent precedent, the 
Court reconsidered its prior holding on causation under the 2010 amendment and held that, 
indeed, the government must prove that the underlying AKS violation was a but-for cause of the 

false claim.                                                              
In October 2023, the Court certified for interlocutory appeal that portion of its order that 
addressed the causation standard applicable to claims for violation of the AKS and FCA under 
the 2010 amendment to the AKS.                                            
On February 18, 2025, the First Circuit issued its opinion on the matter, “affirm[ing] the 
[Court’s] ruling that to treat an AKS violation as a false or fraudulent claim under the FCA, the 
government must prove that the AKS violation was a but-for cause of the false claim.”  
Regeneron, 128 F.4th at 328.  The First Circuit issued its mandate on April 14, 2025. 
The government has now moved for leave to file a second motion for partial summary 
judgment as to the elements of falsity, materiality, and causation under a false-certification 
theory.  It has also moved to reopen discovery on a limited basis so that it may produce evidence 
as to those elements of the claim.                                        
II.  Analysis                                                             
“[D]istrict courts have the inherent authority to manage their dockets and courtrooms 

with a view toward the efficient and expedient resolution of cases.”  Dietz v. Bouldin, 579 U.S. 
40, 47 (2016).  Thus, without any limit in Fed. R. Civ. P. 56 on the number of motions for 
summary judgment that may be filed, it is within the Court’s discretion to grant or deny leave to 
file a second motion for partial summary judgment.  And it is not an abuse of that discretion to 
allow successive motions for summary judgment where those motions “reflect[] material 
changes in the posture of th[e] litigation and [are] grounded on meritorious contentions.”  
F.D.I.C. v. Kooyomjian, 220 F.3d 10, 16 (1st Cir. 2000).                  
The government contends that the Court’s reconsideration of the standard of causation 
under the 2010 amendment, and the First Circuit’s subsequent affirmation, reflect a material 
change in the litigation.  That is, the government contends that it was justified in choosing to 

prosecute its case with a focus on the 2010-amendment theory in reliance on the Court’s 
causation ruling at the motion-to-dismiss stage, and now that the applicable standard of causation 
has changed, it is entitled to proceed under a false-certification theory.  It asserts that a second 
motion for summary judgment, and a limited reopening of discovery, “will streamline the scope 
of the issues to be presented at trial and inform subsequent briefing and decisions on the 
relevance of expert testimony.”  (Gov’t Mot. at 7-8).                     
 In opposition, defendant contends that (1) the government failed to adequately allege a 
false-certification theory in its complaint, (2) in any event, it waived a false-certification theory 
by failing to pursue it, and (3) the government’s proposal is unduly prejudicial to the defense.  
Defendant further contends that even under the government’s narrative, there is no basis to 
reopen discovery, given the ample opportunity the government has had to pursue relevant 
discovery.                                                                
The Court will address each of those issues in turn.                 

A.   Sufficiency of the Pleading                                     
“A complaint must give the defendant fair notice of the claim asserted and the grounds 
upon which it rests.”  W.R. Cobb Co. v. V.J. Designs, LLC, 130 F.4th 224, 240 (1st Cir. 2025).  
The claims at issue here are for violation of the FCA on the basis of underlying violations of the 
AKS.  While “claims under the 2010 amendment run on a separate track than do claims under a 
false-certification theory,” Regeneron, 128 F.4th at 324, each theory is simply a pathway to 
proving falsity in an FCA claim based upon an underlying AKS violation, not an entirely 
separate claim in and of itself.  The fact that “false certification” was never explicitly stated as a 
theory of liability in the complaint is of no moment—“it is factual allegations, not legal theories, 
that must be pleaded in a complaint.”  Whitaker v. Milwaukee Cnty., Wisconsin, 772 F.3d 802, 
808 (7th Cir. 2014).1                                                     

Of course, it would be possible to formulate a complaint that contains allegations 
supporting a claim under one theory but not the other.  For example, a complaint that did not 
contain an allegation of materiality or any allegations concerning certification of compliance 
with the AKS would not state a claim for FCA violation under a false-certification theory but 
might nevertheless state a claim for violation of the FCA under a 2010-amendment theory.  


1 See 5 C. Wright & A. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure § 1219 (4th ed.) (“The federal rules 
effectively abolished the restrictive theory of the pleadings doctrine, making it clear that it is unnecessary to set out a 
legal theory for the plaintiff’s claim for relief.”); Fitzgerald v. Codex Corp., 882 F.2d 586, 589 (1st Cir. 1989) (“The 
‘theory of the pleadings’ doctrine, under which a complaint must proceed upon some definite theory and plaintiff 
must succeed on that theory or not succeed at all, has been all but abolished under the federal rules.”). 
However, that is not the case here.                                       
As stated in the Court’s ruling on defendant’s motion to dismiss, the complaint alleged 
violations of the FCA under the 2010 amendment with sufficient particularity to state a claim.2  
In substance, and assuming compliance with Fed. R. Civ. P. 9(b), the only additional factual 

allegations that would need to appear in the complaint to support a claim under the false-
certification theory would be ones indicating (1) that claims were indeed submitted to the 
government containing either express or implied representations of compliance, (2) that those 
representations were false, and (3) that those representations were material to Medicare’s 
payment decision.  The complaint identifies eleven claimants who allegedly received illegal 
copay subsidies from CDF and submitted Medicare claims for the remainder of the price of 
Eylea.  (Compl. ¶ 101).  It alleges that in order to participate in Medicare Part B, providers must 
enter into agreements certifying that they “understand that payment of a claim by Medicare is 
conditioned upon the claim and the underlying transaction complying with . . . the [AKS],” and 
the complaint reproduces the exact language of that certification from CMS Form 855I.  (Id. 

¶ 92).  Finally, the complaint contains a five-paragraph section alleging that compliance with the 
AKS is material to Medicare’s payment decisions.  (Id. ¶¶ 93-97).  While the complaint does not 
contain allegations of express representations of compliance directly associated with each of the 
identified claims, courts recognize an implied false-certification theory that does not require such 
express representations.  Implied false certification occurs “when the defendant submits a claim 
for payment that makes specific representations about the goods or services provided, but 
knowingly fails to disclose the defendant’s noncompliance with a statutory, regulatory, or 


2 The change in the standard for causation under the 2010 amendment does not impact the sufficiency of 
the pleadings to state a claim under a false-certification theory, because that particular standard does not apply to 
false certification.                                                      
contractual requirement.”  Universal Health Servs., Inc. v. United States, 579 U.S. 176, 181 
(2016).  According to the complaint, the providers submitted their claims along with “procedure 
codes” identifying that they were requesting reimbursement for the provision of Eylea.  (Compl. 
¶¶ 100-01).  The submission of those codes plausibly amounts to specific representations about 

the goods or services provided.  Therefore, even assuming the providers simply failed to disclose 
their noncompliance with the AKS, the complaint alleges sufficient facts to state a plausible 
claim for violation of the FCA under a false-certification theory.3       
B.   Waiver, Prejudice, and Discovery                                
Generally, “[p]laintiffs may not ‘raise new and unadvertised theories of liability for the 
first time in opposition to a motion for summary judgment.’”  Miranda-Rivera v. Toledo-Davila, 
813 F.3d 64, 76 (1st Cir. 2016) (quoting Calvi v. Knox Cty., 470 F.3d 422, 431 (1st Cir. 2006)).  
The reasoning is that “[a]llowing a plaintiff to proceed on new, unple[aded] theories after the 
close of discovery would prejudice defendants, who would have focused their discovery efforts 
on the theories actually ple[aded].”  Id.  That is essentially the same reasoning that defendant 
contends should apply to the government’s request to pursue a second motion for partial 

summary judgment on a false-certification theory.  However, the procedural circumstances of the 
government’s motion are different in at least two important ways.         
First, the government is simultaneously seeking to reopen discovery on a limited basis to 
allow for the production of evidence uniquely applicable to a false-certification theory, and it is 


3 That is true even under the heightened pleading standard applicable to FCA claims.  The complaint 
identifies eleven claimants who submitted claims after receiving allegedly illegal kickbacks (the who), the illegal 
kickbacks through CDF-funded copay subsidies, the certification of compliance by providers, and the submission of 
claims without disclosure of noncompliance (the what), defendant’s coordination with CDF to ensure that Eylea 
prescriptions were adequately funded (the how), and the locations and dates of the Eylea injections that spurred 
Medicare claims (the when and where).  See U.S. ex rel. Duxbury v. Ortho Biotech Prod., L.P., 579 F.3d 13, 30 (1st 
Cir. 2009).                                                               
seeking leave to initiate a new round of complete briefing on that theory, not raising a new 
theory in the course of a summary judgment-process already in full swing.  Thus, the prejudicial 
impact upon defendant in terms of its ability to mount a full defense is much more limited than if 
the government was seeking to rely on a previously unbriefed theory in opposition to a motion 

for summary judgment.  Second, as established above, false certification is not an “unpleaded 
theory.”  The facts alleged in the complaint were sufficient to state a plausible claim under a 
false-certification theory, and defendant was thus on notice that such a theory was a potential 
pathway for proving the government’s claim.  Defendant did not test the sufficiency of that 
pathway in its motion to dismiss, and the government responded to the challenges raised by 
defendant.  While it may have been more thorough practice on the part of the government to 
raise the false-certification theory as an alternative basis for liability, its failure to do so in 
opposition to a motion to dismiss that did not raise the issue is not a waiver of that theory.   
Furthermore, the factual basis of the government’s claim under the 2010 amendment will 
significantly overlap with that of a claim under a false-certification theory.  Elaboration upon the 

details surrounding the actual submissions for reimbursement will likely be required, but the 
claim will still be fundamentally based upon the allegations laid out in the complaint.  
Even so, “where a plaintiff has misled a defendant as to the nature of [its] claim in [its] 
responses to discovery or [its] arguments regarding pretrial motions,” it would be unfair and 
prejudicial to allow that plaintiff to assert a new theory at the summary judgment stage.  
Ghebreselassie v. Coleman Sec. Serv., 829 F.2d 892, 896 (9th Cir. 1987).  However, there is no 
evidence that the government ever explicitly disclaimed a false-certification theory, or set forth 
arguments or facts inconsistent with such a theory.  Instead, it chose to pursue the “most 
streamlined” path to liability, partially in reliance on the Court’s statement of the law at the 
motion-to-dismiss stage.  Under ordinary circumstances, had the government sought to switch 
theories after the Court’s ruling on summary judgment, its prior course of conduct may indeed 
have risen to the level of “misleading.”  Here, however, the Court’s reconsideration of the 
causation standard under the 2010 amendment, and the First Circuit’s subsequent confirmation 

of that change, amounted to a critical shift in the applicable law.  That change undeniably made 
proving an FCA claim under the 2010 amendment more difficult.  While, typically, a plaintiff 
must bear the risk that its choice of litigation strategy ultimately proves problematic, it would be 
unfair in these circumstances to chain the government to such a choice when the legal ground 
shifts somewhat dramatically mid-way through the litigation.              
In addition, the risks alluded to in the cases cited by defendant are not applicable here.  
There is little risk that allowing a second motion for partial summary judgment here would turn 
the litigation “into a game of whack-a-mole, with seriatim summary judgment proceedings not 
ending until the defendant manages to guess every possible legal theory upon which a plaintiff 
might rely to support a claim.”  Snyder v. Collura, 812 F.3d 46, 51 (1st Cir. 2016).  Here, the 

government is limited to two theories of potential liability, and the Court will not permit any 
others.                                                                   
As to discovery, the government has requested a very limited reopening.  It has 
represented, in fact, that it only seeks to reopen discovery so that it may produce evidence, and 
that it will do so within 30 days.  Crediting that representation, defendant’s argument that 
discovery should not be reopened because of the government’s ample opportunity to take 
discovery loses some of its force.  Of course, defendant may want to take additional discovery, 
and in the interest of fairness the Court may decide to reopen discovery to both parties, restricted 
to evidence directly relevant to the additional elements required to be proved under a false-
certification theory.                                                     
In sum, while this case is certainly long-pending, that is in large part due to the 
reevaluation of a core legal issue underlying the government’s claims.  And the Court finds that 
it is in the interest of justice to allow the government to adjust to that reevaluation and file a 

second motion for partial summary judgment to facilitate an orderly narrowing and clarification 
of issues prior to trial.                                                 
III.  Conclusion                                                          
For the foregoing reasons, the motion of the United States for leave to file a second 
motion for partial summary judgment on the issues of falsity, materiality, and causation under a 
false-certification theory of FCA violation is GRANTED.  The government’s request for a 
limited reopening of discovery is also GRANTED.  The government shall produce any additional 
discovery within 28 days of this order—that is by September 1, 2025—and the scope of any such 
discovery shall be limited to the elements of falsity, materiality, and causation under a false-
certification theory of FCA violation.  The government’s second motion for partial summary 
judgment shall be filed within 30 days of the close of discovery—that is, by October 1, 2025—

and defendant’s opposition shall be filed within 30 days of that deadline—that is, by October 31, 
2025.                                                                     
So Ordered.                                                               

                           /s/  F. Dennis Saylor IV                  
                           F. Dennis Saylor IV                       
                           United States District Judge              

Dated:  August 4, 2025

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
              DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                              

_______________________________________                                   
                           )                                         
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,       )                                         
                           )                                         
     Plaintiff,            )                                         
                           )       Civil Action No.                  
v.                         )       20-11217-FDS                      
                           )                                         
REGENERON PHARMACEUTICALS,      )                                         
INC.,                           )                                         
                           )                                         
     Defendant.            )                                         
_______________________________________)                                  


              MEMORANDUM AND ORDER OF                                
       CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO 28 U.S.C. § 1292(b)                 

SAYLOR, C.J.                                                              

This is an order, issued pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1292(b), certifying for interlocutory 
appeal a portion of a memorandum and order of this Court entered on September 27, 2023.  
(Docket No. 351).  Specifically, the Court certifies an appeal of that portion of the memorandum 
and order that addressed the causation standard applicable to claims for violation of the Anti-
Kickback Statute (“AKS”), 42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b, and the False Claims Act (“FCA”), 31 U.S.C. 
§§ 3729 et seq.  The Court concluded that the proper standard was but-for causation:  that is, in 
order to prove that a claim for Medicare reimbursement “that includes items or services resulting 
from a violation of [the AKS] constitutes a false or fraudulent claim for purposes of [the FCA],” 
42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(g), the government must prove that the AKS violation was a but-for cause 
of the false claim.  (Docket No. 351 at 12-23).                           
On August 14, 2023, Judge Nathaniel M. Gorton of the District of Massachusetts issued 
an order certifying an interlocutory appeal in a case presenting essentially the same issue of 
statutory interpretation.  See United States v. Teva Pharmaceuticals USA, Inc., Civil Action No. 
20-11548-NMG (D. Mass. Aug. 14, 2023) (Docket No. 235).  Judge Gorton, however, reached a 
different conclusion than the undersigned judge.  In substance, he concluded that the standard 
adopted by the Third Circuit in United States ex rel. Greenfield v. Medco Health Sols., Inc., 880 

F.3d 89, 96-98 (3d Cir. 2018), should apply.  See id.  (Docket No. 195, at 6-8).  Under that 
standard, to prove causation, the government need only prove that a particular patient was 
exposed to an illegal recommendation or referral and that a provider then submitted a claim for 
reimbursement pertaining to that patient.  Judge Gorton’s opinion adopted the Greenfield 
standard in light of the opinion of the Court of Appeals in Guilfoile v. Shields, 913 F.3d 178, 190 
(1st Cir. 2019), which cited Greenfield, without elaboration, for the proposition that there must 
be a “sufficient causal connection” between the AKS violation and the false claim. 
The split between the two judges of this court reflects a split in the circuits.  Judge Gorton 
followed the opinion of the Third Circuit in Greenfield, and the undersigned judge followed the 
opinions of the Eighth and Sixth Circuits in United States ex rel. Cairns v. D.S. Med. LLC, 42 

F.4th 828 (8th Cir. 2022), and United States ex rel. Martin v. Hathaway, 63 F.4th 1043 (6th Cir. 
2023).                                                                    
Pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1292(b), a district court may certify an interlocutory order for 
appeal “[w]hen a district judge . . . shall be of the opinion that [an] order [1] involves a 
controlling question of law [2] as to which there is substantial ground for difference of opinion 
and [3] that an immediate appeal from the order may materially advance the ultimate termination 
of the litigation, he shall so state in writing in such order.”  28 U.S.C. § 1292(b). 
This case clearly satisfies the criteria for certification under § 1292(b).  The causation 
standard when the government seeks to prove that a violation of the AKS resulted in a false 
claim is a controlling question of law as to which there is substantial ground for difference of 
opinion, and an immediate appeal will “materially advance the ultimate termination of the 
litigation.”  See id.  Among other things, if both this matter and the Teva matter were to proceed 
to trial—and both trials are expected to be lengthy and complex—at least one of those trials 

would employ an incorrect causation standard, and thus waste considerable time and resources.  
Furthermore, the issue is one of national importance, as reflected in the split among the circuits 
as to the correct standard.                                               
Accordingly, the Court hereby certifies for interlocutory appeal, pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 
§ 1292(b), that portion of its memorandum and order dated September 27, 2023 (Docket No. 
351), that concluded that in order to prove that a claim for Medicare reimbursement “that 
includes items or services resulting from a violation of [the Anti-Kickback Statute] constitutes a 
false or fraudulent claim for purposes of [the False Claims Act],” 42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(g), the 
government must prove that the AKS violation was a but-for cause of the false claim. 
A copy of the memorandum and order is attached as Exhibit A.  The relevant portions are 

at pages 12-23.                                                           
So Ordered.                                                               

                           /s/ F. Dennis Saylor IV                   
                           F. Dennis Saylor IV                       
                           Chief Judge, United States District Court 

Dated:  October 25, 2023                                                  
EXHIBIT A                                          
             UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
              DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                              

_______________________________________                                   
                           )                                         
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,       )                                         
                           )                                         
     Plaintiff,            )                                         
                           )       Civil Action No.                  
v.                         )       20-11217-FDS                      
                           )                                         
REGENERON PHARMACEUTICALS,      )                                         
INC.,                           )                                         
                           )                                         
     Defendant.            )                                         
_______________________________________)                                  


     MEMORANDUM AND ORDER ON THE GOVERNMENT’S                        
      MOTION FOR PARTIAL SUMMARY JUDGMENT AND                        
      REGENERON’S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT                        
SAYLOR, C.J.                                                              
This is a case alleging violations of the Anti-Kickback Statute (“AKS”), 42 U.S.C. 
§ 1320a-7b, and False Claims Act (“FCA”), 31 U.S.C. §§ 3729 et seq., by a pharmaceutical 
company.  The United States has brought suit against Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., the 
manufacturer of a drug named Eylea, alleging that Regeneron improperly funneled millions of 
dollars to the Chronic Disease Fund (“CDF”)—a purportedly independent charitable 
foundation—to subsidize patient copays for Eylea.                         
According to the government, the purpose of the payments was to induce physicians to 
increase prescriptions of the drug at the expense of the Medicare Part B program.  Among other 
things, the government asserts that the contributions to the foundation were not motivated by a 
charitable purpose; instead, Regeneron employees solicited and received Eylea-specific data 
from CDF and improperly used that data to determine the specific amounts Regeneron would 
contribute, and their purpose in doing so, according to the government, was to increase sales of 
Eylea.  The amended complaint alleges that Regeneron’s actions violated the AKS and caused 
the submission of false claims for payment to Medicare.                   
For its part, Regeneron contends that it donated to a bona fide, independent charity in a 
manner that complied with the government’s own regulatory guidance.  It further asserts that its 

donations did not result in or cause any false claims because it was not the only donor for a 
significant portion of the relevant period; CDF awarded assistance on a first-come, first-served 
basis without regard to whether patients used Eylea or another FDA-approved treatment; CDF 
had sufficient funds to cover all copay support provided to Eylea patients in 2013 and 2014 
without any donations from Regeneron in each respective year; and a majority of Eylea patients 
in 2013 were allocated funds from CDF before Regeneron made a single donation. 
The government has moved for partial summary judgment on the issues of materiality, 
causation, and damages under the FCA.  Regeneron has moved for summary judgment as to all 
claims.  For the following reasons, the government’s motion will be denied, and Regeneron’s 
motion will be granted in part and denied in part.                        

I.   Background                                                           
Unless otherwise noted, the following facts are undisputed.          
A.   Factual Background                                              
     1.   The Parties and the Medicare Copay Assistance Program      
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. is a pharmaceutical company.  (Answer ¶ 10).  It 
manufactures Eylea, a drug that treats neovascular (wet) age-related macular degeneration 
(“AMD”), an eye disease that primarily affects elderly people.  (Id. ¶¶ 10, 29).  Eylea is 
administered by injection into the eye at a physician’s office.  (Id. ¶ 29). 
Throughout the period from 2012 through 2014, the other primary drugs used by 
physicians to treat wet AMD were Lucentis and Avastin, both of which are manufactured by 
Genentech.  (Am. Compl. ¶ 30; Def.’s SUF ¶ 4).                            
Medicare, including the Part B program, covers physician-administered drugs, including 
Eylea.  (Answer ¶ 13).  Eylea is a “buy and bill” drug, which means that physicians buy the drug 
before prescribing and administering it to patients, filing a claim with Medicare (and, if 

applicable, a claim with a charity for copay assistance for the patient), and receiving 
reimbursement.  (See Docket No. 275, Ex. 2 (“Kiss Dep. Tr.”) 328:14-329:3). 
     2.   Regeneron’s Donations to CDF                               
The Chronic Disease Fund (“CDF”) is a patient-assistance foundation.  (Gov’t’s SUF 
¶ 6).  More than 99% of CDF’s funding comes from pharmaceutical manufacturers.  (Id. ¶ 7; 
Docket No. 226, Ex. 3 (“Walley Dep. Tr.”) 20:5-10).                       
From at least 2007 through 2014, CDF operated a fund to provide copay assistance to wet 
AMD patients (the “AMD fund”).  (Def.’s SUF ¶ 15; Docket No. 247, Ex. 18 (“Walley Decl.”) 
¶ 5).  The AMD fund covered copays, deductibles, and co-insurance for Medicare patients who 
were prescribed AMD drugs.  (Gov’t’s SUF ¶ 9; Walley Dep. Tr. 26:5-27:14).  Originally, the 
AMD fund covered three FDA-approved treatments for wet AMD:  Lucentis, Macugen, and 

Visudyne.  (Def.’s SUF ¶ 18; Walley Decl. ¶ 6).  It did not, however, cover Avastin, which is 
used off-label for the treatment of wet AMD.  (See Def.’s SUF ¶ 9).  In 2011, after Eylea 
received FDA approval, the AMD fund added it as well.  (Def.’s SUF ¶ 19; Walley Decl. ¶ 6). 
Regeneron had no role in establishing the AMD fund.  (Def.’s SUF ¶ 16; Walley Decl. 
¶ 5).  Before 2011, Genentech, the manufacturer of Lucentis and Avastin, was the only 
manufacturer-donor to the AMD fund; it remained its leading donor until the end of 2013.  
(Def.’s SUF ¶ 29; Walley Decl. ¶ 15).  In 2014, Regeneron became the AMD fund’s only 
manufacturer-donor.  (Def.’s SUF ¶ 31; Walley Decl. ¶ 16).  Patients who received copay 
assistance for treatments from the AMD fund were not provided any information from CDF 
about the source of the assistance they received.  (Def.’s SUF ¶ 28; Walley Decl. ¶ 13). 
B.   Procedural Background                                           
As amended, the complaint alleges presentation of false claims in violation of the False 
Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(A) (2009) (Count 1); making or using false records material 
to a false or fraudulent claim in violation of the FCA, 31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(B) (2009) (Count 

2); and unjust enrichment (Count 3).  Essentially, the complaint alleges that Regeneron’s efforts 
to funnel money into CDF specifically to reimburse the copays of Eylea patients violated the 
Anti-Kickback Statute, 42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(b).  The resulting claims to Medicare were 
allegedly tainted by illegal kickbacks in violation of the FCA.           
The government has moved for partial summary judgment on the issues of materiality, 
causation, and damages under the FCA.  Regeneron has moved for summary judgment on all 
counts.                                                                   
II.  Standard of Review                                                   
The role of summary judgment is “to pierce the pleadings and to assess the proof in order 
to see whether there is a genuine need for trial.”  Mesnick v. General Elec. Co., 950 F.2d 816, 

822 (1st Cir. 1991) (quoting Garside v. Osco Drug, Inc., 895 F.2d 46, 50 (1st Cir. 1990)).  
Summary judgment shall be granted when “there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact 
and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a).  A genuine 
issue is “one that must be decided at trial because the evidence, viewed in the light most 
flattering to the nonmovant, would permit a rational factfinder to resolve the issue in favor of 
either party.”  Medina-Munoz v. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., 896 F.2d 5, 8 (1st Cir. 1990) 
(citation omitted).  In evaluating a summary judgment motion, the court indulges all reasonable 
inferences in favor of the nonmoving party.  See O’Connor v. Steeves, 994 F.2d 905, 907 (1st 
Cir. 1993).  When “a properly supported motion for summary judgment is made, the adverse 
party must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.”  Anderson v. 
Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 250 (1986) (quotations omitted).  The nonmoving party may 
not simply “rest upon mere allegation or denials of his pleading,” but instead must “present 
affirmative evidence.”  Id. at 256-57.                                    

III.  Analysis                                                            
A.   Regulatory Framework                                            
The False Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. §§ 3729-33, imposes civil liability for anyone who 
“knowingly presents, or causes to be presented, a false or fraudulent claim for payment or 
approval” or “knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made or used, a false record or statement 
material to a false or fraudulent claim.”  31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(A), (a)(1)(B).  A “claim” is “any 
request or demand . . . for money or property” presented to an officer, employee, or agent of the 
United States.  31 U.S.C. § 3729(b)(2).                                   
The Anti-Kickback Statute, 42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b, states that “[w]hoever knowingly and 
willfully offers or pays any remuneration (including any kickback, bribe, or rebate) directly or 
indirectly, overtly or covertly, in cash or in kind to any person to induce such person . . . to 

purchase . . . or recommend purchasing . . . any good, facility, service, or item for which 
payment may be made in whole or in part under a Federal health care program” shall be guilty of 
a felony.  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(b)(2).                                    
In 2010, Congress amended the AKS to provide that any Medicare claim “that includes 
items or services resulting from a violation of [the AKS] constitutes a false or fraudulent claim 
for purposes of [the FCA].”  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(g); Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act, Pub. L. 111-148, 124 Stat. 119 (2010).  In other words, an “AKS violation that results in a 
federal health care payment is a per se false claim under the FCA.”  Guilfoile v. Shields, 913 F.3d 
178, 190 (1st Cir. 2019) (quoting United States ex rel. Lutz v. United States, 853 F.3d 131, 135 
(4th Cir. 2017)).                                                         
B.   Regeneron’s Motion for Summary Judgment                         
Regeneron has moved for summary judgment on all claims.  As to the claims under the 
FCA, it contends that the government (1) cannot prove a predicate AKS violation; (2) cannot 
show that its donations resulted in the submission of any false Medicare claim; and (3) cannot 

prove that Regeneron had the requisite knowledge and intent.  Regeneron has also moved for 
summary judgment on the unjust-enrichment claim.  Each will be addressed in turn. 
     1.   Whether the Government Can Show an AKS Violation           
The first question is whether the evidence is sufficient to establish a violation of the AKS.  
As noted, that statute makes it illegal to “offer[] or pay[] any remuneration . . . to induce [any] 
person . . . to purchase . . . or recommend purchasing . . . any . . . item for which payment may be 
made in whole or in part under a Federal health care program.”  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(b)(2).  
Liability under the AKS requires an “intent to induce a referral or recommendation”; “[a]n intent 
to induce referrals . . . means an intent ‘to gain influence over the reason or judgment’ of the 
[prescribing] physicians.”  United States v. Medtronic, Inc., 189 F. Supp. 3d 259, 268, 271 (D. 

Mass. 2016) (quoting United States v. McClatchey, 217 F.3d 823, 834 (10th Cir. 2000)).  Put 
another way, “the heartland of what the AKS is intended to prevent [is] the use of payments to 
improperly influence decisions on the provision of health care that lead to claims for payment to 
federal health care programs,” such as Medicare.  Guilfoile, 913 F.3d at 192-93. 
A person or company who offers or pays remuneration to a healthcare provider violates 
the AKS “so long as one purpose of the offer or payment is to induce Medicare or Medicaid 
patient referrals.”  McClatchey, 217 F.3d at 835 (emphasis added).  However, a person or 
company “cannot be convicted merely because [he] hoped or expected or believed that referrals 
may ensue from remuneration that was designed wholly for other purposes.”  Id. at 834.  The 
factfinder must make the “difficult factual determination” of a payor-company’s intent in paying 
or offering remuneration to a healthcare provider:  that is, is the prospect of inducing Medicare-
funded patient referrals the “motivating factor” for the remunerative relationship, or is it simply a 
“collateral hope or expectation”?  Id. at 834 n.7.  The former would subject the payor-company 

to liability under the AKS, while the latter would not.                   
The practice of waiving copays, or making donations to offset the cost of copays, may 
violate the AKS.  Copay discounts or waivers made directly to patients certainly implicate the 
AKS.  The Seventh Circuit has found that a pharmacy’s practice of forgiving the copays of 
Medicare customers, and providing them small gifts (such as tins of caviar), in order to induce 
them to fill their prescriptions there, rather than at competitor pharmacies, was a “kickback” 
under the AKS:                                                            
The fraudulent character of giving discounts or refunds to the pharmacy’s 
customers is less obvious—what is wrong with offering an inducement that 
reduces a product’s cost to the consumer?  The answer is that a discount or refund 
can become a “kickback” . . . because it artificially inflates the price that the 
government pays pharmacies for prescription drugs for Medicare or Medicaid 
beneficiaries . . . The [discount or] refund to the customer would thus have been a 
“kickback” . . . because it would have increased the pharmacy’s sales (and 
presumably its profits, as otherwise it wouldn’t provide refunds) at the 
government’s expense.  It would have had done so either by diverting customers 
from other pharmacies or by inducing customers to purchase drugs that they 
would not have been willing to purchase had they been responsible for the copay. 
United States ex rel. Grenadyor v. Ukrainian Vill. Pharmacy, Inc., 772 F.3d 1102, 1104-05 (7th 
Cir. 2014).                                                               
Similarly, improperly structured donations to copay-assistance charities may violate the 
AKS if they are made with the intent to induce Medicare-funded referrals or drug purchases.  
See, e.g., United States v. Teva Pharms. USA, Inc., 2023 WL 4565105 (D. Mass. July 14, 2023). 
In 2005, the Office of the Inspector General for the Department of Health and Human 
Services (“HHS-OIG”), the agency that administers Medicare, issued a “special advisory 
bulletin” addressing how companies may contribute to copay-assistance programs without 
violating the AKS and FCA.  See HHS-OIG, Special Advisory Bulletin on Patient Assistance 
Programs for Medicare Part D Enrollees, 70 Fed. Reg. 70623 (Nov. 22, 2005).1  The 2005 
bulletin advises that “pharmaceutical manufacturers can donate to bona fide independent charity 

PAPs [patient assistance programs], provided appropriate safeguards exist.”  Id. at 70625.  The 
bulletin contains an illustrative list of such safeguards, stating that a pharmaceutical company’s 
donations to an independent copay-assistance charity “should raise few, if any, anti-kickback 
statute concerns,” as long as:                                            
(i) Neither the pharmaceutical manufacturer nor any affiliate . . . exerts any direct 
or indirect influence or control over the charity or the subsidy program; 

(ii) The charity awards assistance in a truly independent manner that severs any 
link between the pharmaceutical manufacturer’s funding and the beneficiary (i.e., 
the assistance provided to the beneficiary cannot be attributed to the donating 
pharmaceutical manufacturer);                                        

(iii) The charity awards assistance without regard to the pharmaceutical 
manufacturer’s interests and without regard to the beneficiary’s choice of product, 
provider, practitioner, supplier, or Part D drug plan;               

(iv) The charity provides assistance based upon a reasonable, verifiable, and 
uniform measure of financial need that is applied in a consistent manner; and 

(v) The pharmaceutical manufacturer does not solicit or receive data from the 
charity that would facilitate the manufacturer in correlating the amount or 
frequency of its donations with the number of subsidized prescriptions for its 
products.                                                            

Id. at 70626.  It adds in a footnote to section (v):                      
We have previously approved a bona fide independent charity PAP arrangement 
that included only limited reporting of aggregate data to donors in the form of 
monthly or less frequent reports containing aggregate data about the number of 
all applicants for assistance in a disease category and the number of patients 
qualifying for assistance in that disease category . . . Reporting of data that is not 

1 While the bulletin is directed to enrollees of Medicare Part D, the guidance (how to contribute to copay-
assistance foundations without violating the AKS and FCA) is applicable to both Parts B and D. 
in the aggregate or that is patient specific would be problematic, as would 
reporting of any data, whether or not in the aggregate, related to the identity, 
amount, or nature of subsidized drugs.                               

Id. at 70626 n.16.  The bulletin summarizes these safeguards by stating the operative rule or 
criteria for evaluating the legality of donations to PAPs as follows:  “Simply put, the independent 
charity PAP must not function as a conduit for payments by the pharmaceutical manufacturer to 
patients and must not impermissibly influence beneficiaries’ drug choices.”  Id. at 70627. 
As set forth below, here the government has proffered sufficient facts to withstand a 
motion for summary judgment as to whether Regeneron violated the AKS.     
          a.   Remuneration                                          
The first issue is whether the donations by Regeneron to CDF qualify as “remuneration” 
under the AKS.  Regeneron asserts that it had no control over which AMD treatments or patients 
CDF assisted, and that its donations therefore do not fall within the statutory prohibition.  As 
noted, however, “the AKS prohibits even the indirect receipt of prohibited remuneration.”  
United States ex rel. Banigan v. Organon USA Inc., 2016 WL 10704126, at *3 n.8 (D. Mass. 
Aug. 23, 2016).  Here, there is evidence that the promise of copay assistance through CDF 
indirectly provided remuneration to the physicians prescribing Eylea.  Remuneration means 
“anything of value”; the copay assistance eliminates the financial risk to physicians if they 
prescribed a drug for which patients cannot pay.  (See, e.g., Docket No. 247, Ex. 52 (“Miller 
Decl.”) ¶ 4 (“I have to be cognizant of the costs of these drugs; I cannot take on the cost of 
patient balances myself.”); id. at ¶ 5 (“[T]he availability of copay assistance often gives me the 
option to administer Eylea if Eylea is the wet AMD drug that I prefer for a given patient.”)).2  


2 This definition of “remuneration” derives from a 1994 HHS-OIG bulletin:  “In certain cases, a provider, 
practitioner or supplier who routinely waives Medicare copayments or deductibles also could be held liable under 
the Medicare and Medicaid anti-kickback statute.  42 U.S.C. 1320a-7b(b).  The statute makes it illegal to offer, pay, 
Under the circumstances, there is sufficient evidence that the government can prove that the 
donations constituted “remuneration” within the meaning of the AKS.3      
          b.   Inducement of Claims                                  
The second issue is whether the donations constituted an “inducement” to purchase an 
item within the meaning of the AKS.  Regeneron asserts that the structure of CDF made it 

impossible for the donations to “improperly influence” or “impermissibly influence” doctors’ 
and patients’ decision to purchase Eylea.  See Guilfoile, 913 F.3d at 192-93; 70 Fed. Reg. 70627.  
For example, it contends that CDF allocated its AMD grants to patients on a first-come, first-
served basis, and that physicians therefore had no way of knowing whether a patient would 
eventually receive copay assistance from CDF when they made their prescribing decisions. 
However, the record contains evidence suggesting that at least some doctors did know 
about the availability of copay assistance before administering Eylea, and that the expectation of 
copay assistance did, in fact, change their behavior.  (See, e.g., Docket No. 247, Ex. 47 
(“Sarrafizadeh Decl.”) ¶ 4 (“Co-pay assistance for Medicare patients is a huge help in removing 
financial considerations from treatment decisions.  Many Medicare patients with concerns about 

the high cost of co-pays can get branded wet AMD treatment like Eylea because of foundation 
payments.  I am able to prescribe whichever drug I would like to my Medicare patients because I 
know the co-pay foundation will cover or significantly reduce their co-pays for branded drugs.”); 

solicit or receive anything of value as an inducement to generate business payable by Medicare or Medicaid.”  HHS-
OIG, Publication of OIG Special Fraud Alerts, 59 Fed. Reg. 65375 (Dec. 19, 1994) (emphasis added).  
3 There is sufficient evidence that the government can prove that the donations constituted “remuneration” 
within the meaning of the AKS even under the Sixth Circuit’s interpretation of the term in United States ex rel. 
Martin v. Hathaway, 63 F.4th 1043 (6th Cir. 2023).  The court in Martin considered whether renumeration “covers 
just payments and other transfers of value or any act that may be valuable to another.”  Id. at 1048.  The court held 
that the term “renumeration” is limited to “payments and other transfers of value,” reasoning that a broader 
definition both contravenes the “four corners of the statute” and “lacks a coherent end point.”  Id. at 1048, 1050-52.  
In reaching that conclusion, the court found that a hospital’s decision not to hire a particular doctor did not amount 
to an “offer of referrals” to another doctor.  Id. at 1052.               
Docket No. 247, Ex. 48 (“Siegel Decl.”) ¶ 4 (discussing the availability of copay assistance from 
CDF for “many of [her] patients”); Docket No. 247, Ex. 49 (“Khan Decl.”) ¶ 5 (“I typically have 
freedom of choice when prescribing wet AMD drugs to Medicare Part B patients because I know 
the patients will be able to afford the drugs once they receive copay assistance.”); Docket No. 

275, Ex. 72 (“Subramanian Decl.”) ¶¶ 4-5 (“Cost is a consideration for me when recommending 
treatment.  I will not administer Eylea unless the patient’s insurance will cover it or the patient 
receives assistance or wants to pay out of pocket . . . Copay assistance or full payment assistance 
is usually available for my patients.  My understanding is that this assistance comes from 
Regeneron.”)).                                                            
Accordingly, there is sufficient evidence that the remuneration structure “influence[d] 
decisions on the provision of health care,” Guilfoile, 913 F.3d at 193, and thus induced Medicare 
claims for Eylea.                                                         
          c.   Intent to Induce Claims                               
The third question is whether there is evidence that Regeneron had the necessary intent to 
induce purchases of Eylea.  The government has submitted evidence that at least some 

Regeneron employees understood that they were receiving Eylea-specific data from CDF, used 
CDF-provided data to perform ROI calculations that affected the amount of Regeneron’s 
contributions to CDF, and sought to conceal their use of such data from internal auditors. 
For example, William Daniels, who testified that he “was Regeneron’s main point of 
contact to co-pay assistance foundations and managed the relationship between Regeneron and 
those foundations,” stated that he “had been receiving data from CDF that was specific to Eylea” 
and that he used CDF data to perform ROI calculations.  (Docket No. 275, Ex. 3 (“Daniels Dep. 
Tr.”) 11:22-24, 97:5-6).  In addition, there is evidence that Bob Terifay, Regeneron’s former 
Vice President of Commercial, changed an email from Daniels before forwarding it to the 
internal audit team (a change that the government contends was made in order to conceal from 
internal auditors that Regeneron possessed Eylea-specific data from CDF).  (See Docket No. 315, 
Ex. 1).                                                                   
That evidence could support an inference that Regeneron intended to use CDF as a 

conduit to reimburse patients and influence the choices of physicians, and therefore had more 
than a vague “hope or expectation” that Eylea purchases would increase following donations to 
CDF.  See McClatchey, 217 F.3d at 834 n.7.4  Ultimately, intent is a “difficult factual 
determination” that should be left for a jury to decide, rather than the court at the summary-
judgment stage.  See id.                                                  
In summary, viewing the entire record in the light most favorable to the government and 
drawing all reasonable inferences in its favor, there is evidence that Regeneron paid 
remuneration, through donations to CDF, in order to induce physicians to recommend Medicare-
subsidized purchases of its drugs and to induce patients to purchase those drugs.  Accordingly, 
summary judgment will not be granted on the basis that there is insufficient evidence to establish 

a violation of the AKS.                                                   
     2.   Whether the Government Can Show that Regeneron’s Donations 
          Resulted in False Claims                                   
As noted, any claim for Medicare reimbursement “that includes items or services 
resulting from a violation of [the AKS] constitutes a false or fraudulent claim for purposes of 

4 Nor can Regeneron establish at this stage that its intent was categorically proper based on the “safe 
harbor” described in the 2005 HHS-OIG guidance.  Special Advisory Bulletin on Patient Assistance Programs for 
Medicare Part D Enrollees, 70 Fed. Reg. 70623.  The government has proffered some evidence (which Regeneron 
challenges) that Regeneron’s combined donations to CDF in 2013 and 2014 closely tracked the AMD fund’s total 
Eylea assistance during that period, which, in turn, could permit an inference that CDF unlawfully “function[ed] as a 
conduit for payments by the pharmaceutical manufacturer to patients.”  Id. at 70627. 
In addition, given evidence that “[p]atients granted copay assistance for a calendar year did not necessarily 
receive copay assistance during that year,” at this stage, the Court declines to compare the amount of its donations 
and CDF’s assistance only on an annual basis.  (See Docket No. 247, Ex. 22 (“Resnick Report”) at 8 ¶ 19). 
[the FCA].”  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(g) (emphasis added).  In other words, an “AKS violation that 
results in a federal health care payment is a per se false claim under the FCA.”  Guilfoile, 913 
F.3d at 190 (citing Lutz, 853 F.3d at 135).                               
The meaning of the term “resulting from” is not settled, and has led to differing 

interpretations.  See United States ex rel. Fitzer v. Allergan, Inc., 2022 WL 846211 at *9 (D. Md. 
Mar. 22, 2022) (“Courts around the country have struggled to define the standard of causation 
that is required to prove an FCA claim based on an AKS violation.”).  At a minimum, the 
language clearly suggests that there must be a causal relationship of some kind between the AKS 
violation and the medical decision that resulted in the false claim.  To date, the only 
pronouncement by the First Circuit on the question has been in Guilfoile:  “[I]f there is a 
sufficient causal connection between an AKS violation and a claim submitted to the federal 
government, that claim is false within the meaning of the FCA.”  Guilfoile, 913 F.3d at 190 
(citing United States ex rel. Greenfield v. Medco Health Sols., Inc., 880 F.3d 89, 96-98 (3d Cir. 
2018)).                                                                   

The precise requirements of that “sufficient causal connection” are unclear.  Among the 
principal unsettled questions are (1) the legal standard (but-for causation, or some other, less 
demanding, standard); (2) the nature and amount of the evidence that the government must 
present to prove the causal connection; and (3) the extent to which the defendant can offer 
countervailing evidence of a lack of causation.                           
Before turning to an analysis of the caselaw, there are two threshold questions.  The first 
is whether the Third Circuit’s decision in Greenfield is effectively binding on this Court.  
According to the government, it is, because the First Circuit cited that decision in Guilfoile for 
the proposition that there must be “a sufficient causal connection” between the violation and the 
submitted claim.  Id.  It is true that the court in Guilfoile cited—although it did not discuss— 
Greenfield.  But the court expressly disclaimed making a decision on the “full implications” of 
the statute, and did not elaborate on what it meant by a “sufficient causal connection.”  Id. 5  The 
court explained that engaging in such an analysis would be superfluous, as the issue facing the 

court was “not the standard for proving an FCA violation based on the AKS, but rather the 
requirements for pleading an FCA retaliation claim.”  Id.6  Under the circumstances, this Court 
does not find Greenfield, or the causation standard set forth in that opinion, to be binding. 7 
The second question is whether this Court is bound by its own earlier decision in this 
case, issued December 4, 2020, denying Regeneron’s motion to dismiss.  Again, the answer to 
that question is no.  That opinion did address the issue of causation, but at a relatively superficial 
level; moreover, that discussion was not informed by the opinion of the Eighth Circuit in United 
States ex rel. Cairns v. D.S. Med. LLC, 42 F.4th 828 (8th Cir. 2022), and the Sixth Circuit in in 
United States ex rel. Martin v. Hathaway, 63 F.4th 1043 (6th Cir. 2023), neither of which had yet 
been issued.  United States v. Regeneron Pharms., Inc., 2020 WL 7130004, at *14-15 (D. Mass. 

Dec. 4, 2020).  Furthermore, and in any event, that decision was an interlocutory order, which is 
subject to reconsideration at any point.8  This Court will therefore consider the causation issue 

5 The Guilfoile court noted:  “We have previously declined to directly address the impact of § 1320a-7b(g) 
on FCA actions, see Hutcheson, 647 F.3d at 379 n.1, and we do not attempt to assess the full implications of the 
AKS provision today.”  Guilfoile, 880 F.3d at 190.                        

6 That distinction is potentially significant, because pleading a retaliation claim under the FCA “does not 
require adequately pleading the submission of a false claim or meeting the Rule 9(b) standards for pleading fraud.”  
Guilfoile, 880 F.3d at 189.  Plaintiffs who allege retaliation must only “plausibly plead a reasonable amount of 
smoke — conduct that could reasonably lead to an FCA action based on the submission of a false claim.”  Id. 

7 At least two other courts in this district, however, have concluded that Guilfoile counsels following 
Greenfield.  See Teva, 2023 WL 4565105, at *5 (D. Mass. July 14, 2023) (quoting United States ex rel. Bawduniak 
v. Biogen Idec Inc., 2022 WL 2438971, at *2 (D. Mass. July 5, 2022)).  The Bawduniak court, however, 
acknowledged that the “First Circuit's analysis may not be binding.”  Bawduniak, 2022 WL 2438971, at *2.  

8 The doctrine of law of the case is not implicated, because ‘[i]nterlocutory orders, including denials of 
motions to dismiss, remain open to trial court reconsideration, and do not constitute the law of the case.’”  Harlow v. 
anew, without being bound by its prior ruling.                            
To date, there are three circuit opinions directly addressing the meaning of the term 
“resulting from a violation.”  See Greenfield, 880 F.3d at 96-100; Cairns, 42 F.4th at 834-37; 
Martin, 63 F.4th at 1052-55.  As set forth below, those three opinions adopt two different 

approaches.                                                               
In Greenfield, 880 F.3d 89, the Third Circuit rejected a standard that would require proof 
“that federal beneficiaries would not have used the relevant services absent the alleged kickback 
scheme.”  Id. at 100.  The court did not perform a textual analysis of the term “resulting from,” 
or consider how that phrase had been interpreted in other contexts.  Instead, it concluded that a 
requirement of but-for causation “would dilute the False Claims Act’s requirements vis-à-vis the 
Anti-Kickback Statute, as direct causation would be a precondition to bringing a False Claims 
Act case but not an Anti-Kickback Statute case.”  Id. at 97.  It further reasoned that such a 
standard would be inconsistent with the intentions of the drafters of the AKS, who sought “to 
strengthen the capability of the Government to detect, prosecute, and punish fraudulent activities 

under the [M]edicare and [M]edicaid programs.”  Id. at 96 (quoting H.R. Rep. No. 95-393, at 1 
(1977)).  As a result, it concluded that the legislative history suggests that a but-for causation 
standard was not required.  Id. at 96-98.                                 
Instead, the Greenfield court determined that the phrase “resulting from” requires the 
plaintiff (there, a relator) to prove only “a link between the alleged kickbacks and the medical 
care received.”  Id. at 100 (emphasis added).  Such a plaintiff need not “show that a kickback 

Children’s Hosp., 432 F.3d 50, 55 (1st Cir. 2005) (quoting Perez-Ruiz v. Crespo-Guillen, 25 F.3d 40, 42 (1st Cir. 
1994)); see also Daumont-Colón v. Cooperativa de Ahorro y Crédito de Caguas, 982 F.3d 20, 26 (1st Cir. 2020) 
(“[T]he Civil Rules authorize district courts to revise their own orders and decisions at any time before entering final 
judgment.” (citing Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(b))).                               
directly influenced a patient's decision to use a particular medical provider,” but must 
demonstrate “some connection between a kickback and a subsequent reimbursement claim.”  Id. 
at 97, 100.9  The court expressly rejected the “taint” theory proposed by the relator, stating that 
“the taint of a kickback” does not “render[] every reimbursement claim false.”  Id. at 100.  

Instead, it concluded that a kickback will not “morph into a false claim unless a particular patient 
is exposed to an illegal recommendation or referral and a provider submits a claim for 
reimbursement pertaining to that patient.”  Id.10                         
In Cairns, 42 F.4th 828, the Eighth Circuit declined to follow Greenfield, and instead 
held that “when a plaintiff seeks to establish falsity or fraud through the 2010 amendment, it 
must prove that a defendant would not have included particular ‘items or services’ but for the 
illegal kickbacks.”  Id. at 836.                                          
The court approached the issue as one of statutory interpretation.  It began by observing 
that “[w]hen a statute is unambiguous, interpretation both begins and ends with the text.”  Id. at 
834 (citing Food Mktg. Inst. v. Argus Leader Media, 139 S.Ct. 2356 (2019)).  It then noted that 

the Supreme Court had interpreted “a nearly identical phrase, ‘results from,’ in the Controlled 
Substances Act” in Burrage v. United States, 571 U.S. 204 (2014).  Id.  There, the Supreme 
Court interpreted the phrase “results from” in that Act to require but-for causation.  See Burrage, 
571 U.S. at 212 (“Where there is no textual or contextual indication to the contrary, courts 
regularly read phrases like ‘results from’ to require but-for causality.”).  Because that but-for 

9 The court concluded that establishing “temporal proximity” between the kickbacks and the submission of 
claims, without more, is not enough.  Id. at 100.                         
10 Although as yet there are no other circuit opinions following Greenfield, the opinion has been followed 
by other district courts outside of Massachusetts.  See, e.g., United States v. Teva Pharms. USA, Inc., 2019 WL 
13244248, at *2-3 (S.D.N.Y. Apr. 11, 2019); Fitzer, 2022 WL 846211 at *9; Kuzma v. N. Arizona Healthcare 
Corp., 2022 WL 2159027, at *10 (D. Ariz. June 15, 2022); United States ex. rel. Wallace v. Exactech, Inc., 2020 
WL 4500493, at *19 (N.D. Ala. Aug. 5, 2020).                              
causation standard is the “default” or “background” rule against which Congress legislates, and 
because there are no textual indications to the contrary in the 2010 amendments, the court 
declined to consider legislative history and the drafters’ purported intentions.  Cairns, 42 F.4th at 
835-36.                                                                   

Like the Greenfield court, the Cairns court expressly rejected the “taint” theory proposed 
by the government.  Id. at 835.  The government had argued that “all that is required is that the 
illegal kickbacks ‘tainted’ the ‘claim[] for goods or services’ or the anti-kickback ‘violation itself 
may have been a contributing factor.’”  Id.  The court observed:          
These alternative standards, however, are hardly causal at all.  A ‘taint’ could 
occur without the illegal kickbacks motivating the inclusion of any of the ‘items 
or services.’  Similarly, asking the jury if a violation ‘may have been a 
contributing factor’ does not establish anything more than a mere possibility. 

Id.  It further observed that as a matter of statutory construction, the phrase “resulting from” is 
“unambiguously causal,” and therefore it was unnecessary to substitute a different causal 
standard when Congress itself had not done so.  Id. at 836.  It noted that if Congress intended to 
codify an expanded understanding of AKS enforcement in the 2010 amendments, “it could have 
selected different language.”  Id.                                        
Most recently, in Martin, 63 F.4th 1043, the Sixth Circuit followed Cairns and adopted a 
but-for causation standard, reasoning that “[w]here a statute ‘yields a clear answer, judges must 
stop.’”  Id. at 1053 (quoting Argus Leader Media, 139 S.Ct. 2356, 2364 (2019)).  The court noted 
that “[t]he ordinary meaning of ‘resulting from’ is but-for causation,” and legislative history does 
not “overcome the ordinary meaning of the text.”  Id. at 1052-53.  In addition, it observed that 
“we generally do not consider legislative history in construing a statute with criminal 
applications, the idea being that no one should be imprisoned based on a document or statement 
that never received the full support of Congress and was presented to the president for 
signature.”  Id. at 1054.11  And it cautioned that “reading causation too loosely” would mean that 
“[m]uch of the workaday practice of medicine might fall within an expansive interpretation of 
the Anti-Kickback Statute.”  Id. at 1054.  A looser theory of causation would fail to “protect 
doctors of good intent, sweeping in the vice-ridden and virtuous alike.”  Id.  A standard of but-

for causation, on the other hand, “still leaves plenty of room to target genuine corruption.”  Id. at 
1055.  Accordingly, the court granted a motion to dismiss where there was “not one claim for 
reimbursement identified with particularity in this case that would not have occurred anyway.”  
Id. at 1053.  (“[T]he alleged scheme did not change anything.”).          
Here, the government acknowledges that it has the burden of proving some form of 
causal connection.  In substance, it contends that the “exposure” theory set forth in Greenfield is 
correct:  that is, once it has proved that an AKS violation occurred, all that is required to prove a 
causal link is that “a particular patient is exposed to an illegal recommendation or referral and a 
provider submits a claim for reimbursement pertaining to that patient.”  Greenfield, 880 F.3d at 
100.  According to the government, proof of but-for causation is not required, and evidence that 

a kickback actually influenced (or did not influence) a physician’s medical judgment is 
irrelevant.  Regeneron, in turn, contends in substance that a “but-for” causation standard should 
apply, and that the government bears the burden of proving that an AKS violation occurred and 
that the remuneration actually caused the physician to provide different medical treatment (and 
thus caused the false claims).                                            


11 In a discussion earlier in the opinion concerning the term “remuneration,” the Martin court observed: 
Recall that the same language creates civil and criminal liability.  In the context of dual-application statutes 
like this one, we give the same interpretation to the same words, whether applied in a civil or criminal 
setting.  That means that, if ambiguity exists over the meaning of a provision, the rule of lenity favors a 
narrower definition.                                                 
63 F.4th at 1050.                                                         
In the court’s view, the standard set forth in Greenfield is fraught with problems.  To 
begin, and as the Cairns and Martin courts observed, that standard is divorced from the actual 
language of the statute and from basic principles of statutory interpretation.  It is likewise 
disconnected from long-standing common-law principles of causation.12  As a result, and 

because the standard uses a term (“exposed”) that is not set forth in the statute and is not part of a 
familiar common-law framework, its meaning is unclear and its application in specific factual 
contexts is uncertain.  A simple hypothetical will help to illustrate the point. 
Suppose a doctor has two options for treating a patient with a particular condition:  
product A or product B.  Each year for several years, she writes 50 prescriptions for A and 50 for 
B.  One year, she receives unlawful remuneration from the manufacturer of A, and her 
prescriptions that year rise to 75 for A and drop to 25 for B.  If permitted (and, presumably, 
immunized), she would testify that based on her medical judgment, and in the absence of any 
remuneration, that year she would have written 65 for A and 35 for B.  All the prescriptions 
resulted in Medicare claims.                                              

How many false claims “result[ed] from” that AKS violation?  If the standard is but-for 
causation, and the doctor’s testimony is both permitted and credited, the answer is likely 10 (75 

12 In Universal Health Services v. U.S. ex rel. Escobar, 579 U.S. 176 (2016), the Supreme Court held that a 
theory of implied false certification could provide a basis for liability under the FCA.  In doing so, the Court 
examined the principles of common-law fraud.  It wrote:                   
Congress did not define what makes a claim “false” or “fraudulent.”  But it is a settled principle of 
interpretation that, absent other indication, Congress intends to incorporate the well-settled meaning of the 
common-law terms it uses.  And the term “fraudulent” is a paradigmatic example of a statutory term that 
incorporates the common-law meaning of fraud.                        
Escobar, 579 U.S. 176, at 187 (citation omitted).                         
The Seventh Circuit in United States v. Luce drew upon that reasoning to find that “nothing in the FCA 
contains any indication of an intent to depart from the common-law understanding of causation in fraud cases.”  
United States v. Luce, 873 F.3d 999, 1012 (7th Cir. 2017).  While Luce does not concern the language from the AKS 
at issue in this case, the opinion highlights the principle that Congress is presumed to incorporate well-settled 
judicial interpretations of terms when it enacts legislation.             
minus 65).  If the standard is but-for causation, and the doctor’s testimony is not permitted or not 
credited, the answer is likely 25 (75 minus 50).  If the standard is “taint” (that is, once the 
government has proved that the unlawful remuneration occurred, all of the prescriptions written 
by the doctor for A must be deemed to have resulted in false claims), the answer is 75.13   

But what if the standard is “exposure”?  Again, the Greenfield court expressly rejected 
both a but-for causation standard, 880 F.3d at 96, and a “taint” standard, id. at 100.  In the 
hypothetical, what is the number of claims in which patients were “exposed” to an AKS 
violation?  If the answer is 75, what is the difference between the rejected “taint” standard and 
the permitted “exposure” standard?  If the answer is more or less than 75, what is the analytic 
process that leads to that result?                                        
The Greenfield opinion also effectively bars the defendant from contesting the 
government’s evidence of causation once an AKS violation is proved.  As noted, the court 
concluded that because the government need only prove a “link” between the violation and the 
claim (which, again, it defined as an “exposure’), it is not necessary for the government to prove 

actual causation—that is, that the AKS violation actually caused the provision of the medical 
services that led to the false claim.  Id. at 98, 100.                    
Following Greenfield, another judge in this district described the standard as follows: 
[A] claim is false if it seeks reimbursement for a prescription that was not 
provided in compliance with the Anti-Kickback Statute, regardless of whether the 
claim was the result of a quid-pro-quo exchange or would have been submitted 
even absent the kickback.  See Greenfield, 880 F.3d at 96.  Relators need not 
show that a quid pro quo exchange occurred, or that the physicians would not 
have prescribed Defendant’s medication but for the kickbacks.  It is sufficient to 
show that Defendant paid kickbacks to a physician for the purpose of inducing the 

13 Of course, the matter becomes considerably more complicated once other variables are introduced, such 
as multiple physicians and multiple patients with differing medical circumstances.  The matching of the 
remuneration from the manufacturer to the physician may also be quite difficult, particularly where (as here) the 
alleged remuneration was indirect, more than one manufacturer is potentially involved, and there are temporal and 
other variables that make one-to-one tracing challenging as an evidentiary matter. 
physician to prescribe specific drugs, and that the physician then prescribed those 
drugs, even if the physician would have prescribed those drugs absent the 
kickback.                                                            

United States ex rel. Bawduniak v. Biogen Idec, Inc., 2018 WL 1996829, at *3 (D. Mass. Apr. 
27, 2018).  Thus, under Greenfield, it is “sufficient” for the government to prove that a kickback 
was paid to a physician and the physician then prescribed the product.    
Greenfield, however, went further, and concluded that the intent of the prescribing 
physician and the treated patient are necessarily irrelevant.  880 F.3d at 98.  It is by no means 
obvious that such an approach is correct.  The Court need not decide that issue for purposes of 
the present motion; nonetheless, it is reasonable to ask why the defendant could never be 
permitted to put on any evidence, from any source, suggesting that a particular referral or 
treatment was not actually caused by the AKS violation.  Indeed, if that is correct, an AKS 
violation could lead to liability even if all of the prescribing physicians were unaware of the 
violation, and even if the violation did not cause a single additional referral or prescription.  If 
nothing else, it is unclear how such an inducement “resulted in” any false claims.  Proof of a 
“link” thus becomes akin to an irrebuttable presumption:  it leads to liability even if the facts 
show no actual causation of any kind.14                                   
In any event, in the Court’s view, the statutory construction analysis set forth in Cairns 
and Martin is persuasive.  The adoption by Congress of the “resulting from” language in the 
statute requires a finding that the appropriate standard is but-for causation, and the Court will 
follow that approach here.                                                


14 As this Court noted in United States ex rel. Flanagan v. Fresenius Med. Care Holdings, Inc., another 
possible approach might be to adopt a burden-shifting framework; once the government has proved a prima facie 
case of causation, the burden would shift to the defendant to prove the contrary.  Flanagan, 2022 WL 17417577, at 
*18 (D. Mass. Dec. 5, 2022).                                              
It does not necessarily follow, however, that the government’s burden is thereby made 
insuperably difficult.  To begin, under tort law, but-for causation does not normally require that 
an actor be the sole factual cause of a harm.  See, e.g., Bostock v. Clayton County, 140 S.Ct. 
1731, 1739 (2020) (“[O]ften, events have multiple but-for causes.”).  Under traditional 

principles, a negligent act will satisfy the but-for causation requirement if it was a “substantial 
factor in bringing about” the harm.  Bernier v. Boston Edison Co., 380 Mass. 372, 386 (1980); 
see Tritsch v. Boston Edison Co., 363 Mass. 179, 182 (1973); Falvey v. Hamelburg, 347 Mass. 
430, 435 (1964).15   It is thus likely that the government will not need to prove that the AKS 
violation was the only cause of the resulting false claim.                
As to the quantum of evidence necessary to prove a violation, the government is not 
required in a civil case to adduce proof beyond a reasonable doubt.  Under a preponderance 
standard, it need only prove that it was more likely than not that the AKS violation was the cause 
of the false claim.  And the government, like any litigant, is entitled to attempt to prove its case 
through circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences.  It cannot do so through speculation 

or conjecture (for example, by arguing that there “must have been” a false claim resulting from 
the AKS violation), but its proof need not be beyond all possible doubt.  And the Court sees no 
reason why its evidence may not, in the right circumstances, include proof of temporal 
proximity—although, as in any case where causation is proved in that manner, it may not be 
sufficient, and the reasonableness of the inference may be attenuated as the time period grows 
longer.  See Greenfield, 880 F.3d at 100 (stating that proof of temporal proximity is not enough 


15 The Supreme Judicial Court has recently criticized the term “substantial contributing cause,” calling it 
“confusing” and identifying the standard “proposed in the Restatement (Third) for multiple sufficient cause cases” 
as a more favorable alternative.  Doull v. Foster, 487 Mass. 1, 17-18 (2021).  Nevertheless, it remains true that there 
can be “multiple, simultaneously operating, sufficient causes” of a harm.  Id. at 18. 
to show the requisite “link”); Martin, 63 F.4th at 1053 (stating that “[t]emporal proximity by 
itself does not show causation, and seven months would create few inferences of cause and effect 
anyway.”).                                                                
With that framework in mind, the question then becomes whether the government here 

has proffered sufficient evidence to establish but-for causation.  The government has submitted a 
report from Ian Dew, who analyzed CDF disbursement data in conjunction with Medicare claims 
data and performed a “matching” analysis identifying Medicare claims for which CDF paid some 
or all of the beneficiary’s copay.  (See Gov’t’s SUF ¶¶ 20-21).16  In order to perform that 
analysis, Dew “filtered the Medicare claims to include only those that list a Wet AMD diagnosis 
code” and “filtered the CDF disbursements to include only those disbursements from CDF’s Wet 
AMD fund.”  (Id., Ex. 10 at 1).  He found that “115,192 Medicare claims in 2013 and 2014 had 
part or all of the beneficiary copayment covered by one or more CDF disbursements, and these 
claims resulted in reimbursements of $68,029,431 to providers.”  (Id. at 7).  
In addition, the government points to other evidence that physicians would not have 

submitted claims for Eylea absent the co-pay subsidies.  The price of Avastin, an alternative 
therapy, was dramatically lower than the price of Eylea, and it is surely true that physicians and 
patients alike would take the out-of-pocket cost of a drug into account when making medical 
decisions.  That would be particularly likely here, where Eylea was a buy-and-bill drug that 
would leave the physician’s practice bearing the cost of any unpaid copay obligations. 
Regeneron contends that Dew’s analysis cannot prove a causal “link” between its 
donations and Medicare claims, because he only “matched” disbursements from CDF to Eylea 


16 Regeneron disputes that Dew accurately analyzed that data and determined the Medicare claims for 
which CDF paid some or all of the beneficiary’s copays.                   
patients.  He did so, it asserts, despite evidence that CDF had multiple donors and a surplus of 
funds from another donor at that time.  Thus, according to Regeneron, his analysis proves 
nothing more than “temporal proximity” between the donations and the Medicare claims, which 
Greenfield concluded was insufficient to establish causation.  See 880 F.3d at 100.17   

A similar argument, however, was rejected by another court in this district.  See United 
States v. Teva Pharms. USA, Inc., 560 F. Supp. 3d 412, 422 (D. Mass. 2021) (“Teva’s assertion 
that the government cannot link its donations to specific false claims because other donors 
contributed to the relevant MS funds is unpersuasive.”); see Teva, 2023 WL 4565105, at *3 (D. 
Mass. July 14, 2023) (considering matched-claims analysis of Ian Dew in rejecting defendant’s 
motion for summary judgment as to causation under the FCA).               
The government also contends that Regeneron’s claim of a “surplus” is “misleading” as 
to 2013 and “grossly deceptive” as to 2014; among other things, it notes that Regeneron’s expert 
witness improperly used an end-of-year figure for 2013 of $33 million and a beginning-of-year 
figure for 2014 of $65 million, even though the two figures should have been identical.  (Gov’t 

Opp. at 25-26).                                                           
Based on the record before the Court, it cannot conclude that the government’s evidence, 
including Dew’s analysis, is so flawed or incomplete as to every alleged false claim that 
judgment must necessarily enter for Regeneron.  Resolving all doubts in favor of the government 
as the non-moving party, and construing the evidence in the light most favorable to it, the factual 



17 Regeneron further contends that because Dew testified that he was not expressing an opinion on 
causation, his analysis cannot establish a causal link.  (See Docket No. 261, Ex. 4 (“Dew Dep. Tr.”) 78:12-21).  
Because an expert’s role is to provide opinions on evidence—not on legal concepts such as causation under the AKS 
and FCA—his testimony does not change the Court’s conclusion.             
evidence is sufficient to withstand summary judgment on the issue of causation.  See O’Connor, 
994 F.2d at 907.                                                          
     3.   Whether Regeneron Lacked the Requisite Scienter Under the FCA 
Regeneron next contends that the government cannot establish a knowing violation of the 
FCA because it lacks evidence that the relevant decisionmaker at Regeneron—the CEO, Dr. 
Schleifer—“knowingly” caused the submission of false claims.18            

As a general matter, a corporation is bound by the acts of its employees acting within the 
scope of their employment.  United States v. Bank of New England, N.A., 821 F.2d 844, 856 (1st 
Cir. 1987).19  That principle applies to claims arising under the AKS and the FCA.  See United 
States v. O’Connell, 890 F.2d 563, 568 (1st Cir. 1989) (explaining that the FCA does not 
“contain[] language that would preclude, or has a purpose that would not be served by, applying 
vicarious liability”).  Thus, the relevant scienter is not limited to that of the CEO (who, of course, 
may well have been deceived by his employees); if a single employee of Regeneron had the 
requisite knowledge and intent, that is sufficient.20                     


18 To the extent Regeneron originally asserted that it lacked the requisite scienter because its conduct was 
consistent with an objectively reasonable interpretation of the law, that argument appears to have been foreclosed by 
the Supreme Court’s recent decision in United States ex rel. Schutte v. SuperValu Inc., 143 S.Ct. 1391 (2023) 
(holding that the FCA’s scienter element refers to the defendant’s knowledge and subjective beliefs, not what an 
objectively reasonable person might have known or believed).              
19 Under the “collective knowledge” doctrine, the “knowledge” attributable to a corporation is the sum of 
all of the knowledge possessed by all of its employees, regardless of their position.  See Bank of New England, 821 
F.2d at 856.  For purposes of establishing scienter under the FCA, however, the “collective knowledge” doctrine 
does not apply.  See, e.g., Banigan, 2016 WL 10704126, at *5 (D. Mass. Aug. 23, 2016) (“Courts within the First 
Circuit require at least one individual within a corporate entity to have acted knowingly . . . .”); see also United 
States v. Science Applications Int’l Corp., 626 F.3d 1257, 1274 (D.C. Cir. 2010) (“[U]nder the FCA, ‘collective 
knowledge’ provides an inappropriate basis for proof of scienter because it effectively imposes liability, complete 
with treble damages and substantial civil penalties, for a type of loose constructive knowledge that is inconsistent 
with the Act’s language, structure, and purpose.”).                       
20 To the extent the language in United States ex rel. Dyer v. Raytheon Co., 2013 WL 5348571 (D. Mass. 
Sept. 23, 2013) could be read to suggest that ordinary principles of vicarious liability do not apply in FCA cases, the 
Court will decline to adopt that position.                                
Here, as noted, there is evidence that certain Regeneron employees believed that they 
were improperly receiving Eylea-specific data from CDF and sought to hide that information 
from internal auditors.21  That is evidence from which a reasonable inference could be drawn that 
those employees knew about the remuneration and understood that it was wrongful.  

Accordingly, and under the circumstances, there is sufficient evidence to defeat summary 
judgment on the issue of scienter.                                        
     4.   Unjust Enrichment                                          
Regeneron has also moved for summary judgment on the unjust-enrichment claim, 
contending that the government should be limited to the remedy Congress authorized in the 
FCA.  The Court agrees.                                                   
“[A] party with an adequate remedy at law cannot claim unjust enrichment.”  Shaulis v. 
Nordstrom, Inc., 865 F.3d 1, 16 (1st Cir. 2017).  In addition, “[i]t is the availability of a remedy 
at law, not the viability of that remedy, that prohibits a claim for unjust enrichment.”  Id.  
Accordingly, courts in this district have routinely dismissed unjust-enrichment claims under 
similar facts to those presented here.  See, e.g., Teva, 560 F. Supp. 3d at 423-24 (dismissing 

unjust-enrichment count “[b]ecause an adequate remedy at law exists in the government’s FCA 
claims”); United States ex rel. Martino-Fleming v. South Bay Mental Health Ctrs., 540 F. Supp. 
3d 103, 133 (D. Mass. May 19, 2021) (same).  Accordingly, summary judgment will be granted 
as to the claim of unjust enrichment.                                     



21 Regeneron disputes that its employees were receiving Eylea-specific information from CDF.  However, 
the Court need not resolve that issue at this stage, because “[t]he FCA’s scienter element refers to [defendant’s] 
knowledge and subjective beliefs.”  SuperValu, 143 S.Ct. at 1399; see also id. at 1400 (“[T]he FCA’s standards 
focus primarily on what [defendant] thought and believed.”).  As noted, the government has put forth evidence that 
at least some employees subjectively believed that they were receiving Eylea-specific data. 
C.   The Government’s Motion for Partial Summary Judgment            
The government has moved for partial summary judgment on (1) the materiality of 
violations of the AKS under the FCA; (2) the legal standard for FCA causation for claims 
“resulting from” AKS violations; and (3) the minimum amount of damages that Regeneron owes, 
should the government prove that it violated the FCA.                     

     1.   Materiality                                                
The government contends that healthcare claims that include items or services resulting 
from kickbacks in violation of the AKS are per se materially false for purposes of the FCA.  The 
Court agrees.                                                             
As noted, the 2010 amendment to the AKS clarified that any Medicare claim “that 
includes items or services resulting from a violation of [the AKS] constitutes a false or 
fraudulent claim for purposes of [the FCA].”  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(g); see also Guilfoile, 913 
F.3d at 190 (“We further read the AKS amendment as obviating the need for a plaintiff to plead 
materiality—that is, to plead that compliance with the AKS was material to the government’s 
decision to pay any specific claim.”).  Accordingly, “a violation of the AKS is per se a violation 

of the False Claims Act,” and the government need not prove materiality.  Bawduniak, 2022 WL 
2438971, at *1-2.                                                         
It does not follow, however, that summary judgment will be granted to the government as 
to any claim asserted in the complaint.  The government must still prove that the AKS was 
violated; the fact that its burden of proof is made easier by the 2010 amendment does not entitle 
it, without more, to summary judgment.                                    
     2.   Causation                                                  
The government has moved for summary judgment on the issue of causation, contending 
that it need only show under the Greenfield standard of “exposure” a “sufficient causal 
connection” between Regeneron’s contributions to CDF and the resulting copay-assisted Eylea 
claims that Medicare reimbursed.  For the reasons set forth above, the Court disagrees, and 
concludes that the government must prove but-for causation.  Accordingly, the government’s 
motion for summary judgment as to causation will be denied.               

     3.   Damages                                                    
Finally, the government contends that if it establishes at trial that Regeneron violated the 
FCA, the Court should award damages in the amount of at least $195,800,553—that is, the 
amount the government asserts is the trebled value of the claims it contends were tainted by 
improper copay assistance.22                                              
As a general matter, courts do not entertain motions for partial summary judgment on 
damages where a party’s liability has not yet been determined.  See, e.g., Marshall Contractors, 
Inc. v. Peerless Ins. Co., 827 F. Supp. 91, 93 (D.R.I. 1993) (finding that confronting damages 
questions on summary judgment before liability is established “may be a waste of judicial 
time”); Boden v. St. Elizabeth Med. Ctr., Inc., 2018 WL 4855210, at *4 (E.D. Ky. Oct. 5, 2018) 
(denying motion as premature where movant attempted to “sidestep the crucial issue in this case” 

and place “the Court in the untenable position of being asked to render an advisory opinion on a 
hypothetical determination of critical facts”); Robson v. Duckpond Ltd., 2021 WL 1222429, at *8 
(E.D. Mo. Mar. 31, 2021) (holding that partial summary judgment on damages claims “would 
constitute an improper advisory opinion”).23                              


22 Dew calculated that Regeneron would be liable for at least $65,266,851 in single damages, which, if 
trebled, would amount to $195,800,553.  (See Gov’t’s SUF ¶ 26).           
23 Of course, motions for summary judgment as to damages are not barred in all circumstances.  See, e.g., 
Rudy v. City of Lowell, 777 F. Supp. 2d 255, 259 (D. Mass. 2011); O’Brien v. Town of Agawam, 440 F. Supp. 2d 3, 
8 (D. Mass. 2006).  However, in most cases where courts have granted such a motion, the parties did not “dispute 
the facts or the defendant’s liability.”  See Rudy, 777 F. Supp. 2d at 259; see also City of New York v. Golden 
Although the critical questions in this case—whether Regeneron violated the AKS and 
caused the submission of false claims for payment to Medicare—remain undecided, the 
government has asked the Court to rule on the minimum amount of damages assuming, as a 
hypothetical, that the violations of the AKS and FCA are conclusively established.24  Although 

the Court acknowledges the benefits of resolving matters prior to trial, it is not convinced that 
judicial economy is served by ruling on hypothetical issues that may never have to be addressed.  
It will therefore deny the motion.                                        
IV.  Conclusion                                                           
For the foregoing reasons, the motion of the United States for partial summary judgment 
is DENIED, and the motion for summary judgment of defendant Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, 
Inc., is GRANTED as to the unjust-enrichment claim, and otherwise DENIED. 
So Ordered.                                                               

                           /s/ F. Dennis Saylor IV                   
                           F. Dennis Saylor IV                       
                           Chief Judge, United States District Court 

Dated:  September 27, 2023                                                




Feather Smoke Shop, Inc., 2013 WL 3187049, at *33 (E.D.N.Y. June 20, 2013) (“A court may grant summary 
judgment as to damages following a determination on liability . . . .”) (emphasis added)). 
24 This case is therefore unlike Teva, where the court granted summary judgment on the proper standard for 
measuring damages.  See Teva, 2023 WL 4565105, at *5-6 (“[T]he Court will measure damages in this case as the 
entirety of the government’s payments for the claims resulting from the illegal kickbacks.”).  As the government 
acknowledged at oral argument, it had not previously sought summary judgment on the legal standard for damages, 
but rather the minimum amount of damages.  (Docket No. 339 (“Hearing Tr.”) at 78).

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
              DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                              

_______________________________________                                   
                           )                                         
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,       )                                         
                           )                                         
     Plaintiff,            )                                         
                           )       Civil Action No.                  
v.                         )       20-11217-FDS                      
                           )                                         
REGENERON PHARMACEUTICALS,      )                                         
INC.,                           )                                         
                           )                                         
     Defendant.            )                                         
_______________________________________)                                  


     MEMORANDUM AND ORDER ON THE GOVERNMENT’S                        
      MOTION FOR PARTIAL SUMMARY JUDGMENT AND                        
      REGENERON’S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT                        
SAYLOR, C.J.                                                              
This is a case alleging violations of the Anti-Kickback Statute (“AKS”), 42 U.S.C. 
§ 1320a-7b, and False Claims Act (“FCA”), 31 U.S.C. §§ 3729 et seq., by a pharmaceutical 
company.  The United States has brought suit against Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., the 
manufacturer of a drug named Eylea, alleging that Regeneron improperly funneled millions of 
dollars to the Chronic Disease Fund (“CDF”)—a purportedly independent charitable 
foundation—to subsidize patient copays for Eylea.                         
According to the government, the purpose of the payments was to induce physicians to 
increase prescriptions of the drug at the expense of the Medicare Part B program.  Among other 
things, the government asserts that the contributions to the foundation were not motivated by a 
charitable purpose; instead, Regeneron employees solicited and received Eylea-specific data 
from CDF and improperly used that data to determine the specific amounts Regeneron would 
contribute, and their purpose in doing so, according to the government, was to increase sales of 
Eylea.  The amended complaint alleges that Regeneron’s actions violated the AKS and caused 
the submission of false claims for payment to Medicare.                   
For its part, Regeneron contends that it donated to a bona fide, independent charity in a 
manner that complied with the government’s own regulatory guidance.  It further asserts that its 

donations did not result in or cause any false claims because it was not the only donor for a 
significant portion of the relevant period; CDF awarded assistance on a first-come, first-served 
basis without regard to whether patients used Eylea or another FDA-approved treatment; CDF 
had sufficient funds to cover all copay support provided to Eylea patients in 2013 and 2014 
without any donations from Regeneron in each respective year; and a majority of Eylea patients 
in 2013 were allocated funds from CDF before Regeneron made a single donation. 
The government has moved for partial summary judgment on the issues of materiality, 
causation, and damages under the FCA.  Regeneron has moved for summary judgment as to all 
claims.  For the following reasons, the government’s motion will be denied, and Regeneron’s 
motion will be granted in part and denied in part.                        

I.   Background                                                           
Unless otherwise noted, the following facts are undisputed.          
A.   Factual Background                                              
     1.   The Parties and the Medicare Copay Assistance Program      
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. is a pharmaceutical company.  (Answer ¶ 10).  It 
manufactures Eylea, a drug that treats neovascular (wet) age-related macular degeneration 
(“AMD”), an eye disease that primarily affects elderly people.  (Id. ¶¶ 10, 29).  Eylea is 
administered by injection into the eye at a physician’s office.  (Id. ¶ 29). 
Throughout the period from 2012 through 2014, the other primary drugs used by 
physicians to treat wet AMD were Lucentis and Avastin, both of which are manufactured by 
Genentech.  (Am. Compl. ¶ 30; Def.’s SUF ¶ 4).                            
Medicare, including the Part B program, covers physician-administered drugs, including 
Eylea.  (Answer ¶ 13).  Eylea is a “buy and bill” drug, which means that physicians buy the drug 
before prescribing and administering it to patients, filing a claim with Medicare (and, if 

applicable, a claim with a charity for copay assistance for the patient), and receiving 
reimbursement.  (See Docket No. 275, Ex. 2 (“Kiss Dep. Tr.”) 328:14-329:3). 
     2.   Regeneron’s Donations to CDF                               
The Chronic Disease Fund (“CDF”) is a patient-assistance foundation.  (Gov’t’s SUF 
¶ 6).  More than 99% of CDF’s funding comes from pharmaceutical manufacturers.  (Id. ¶ 7; 
Docket No. 226, Ex. 3 (“Walley Dep. Tr.”) 20:5-10).                       
From at least 2007 through 2014, CDF operated a fund to provide copay assistance to wet 
AMD patients (the “AMD fund”).  (Def.’s SUF ¶ 15; Docket No. 247, Ex. 18 (“Walley Decl.”) 
¶ 5).  The AMD fund covered copays, deductibles, and co-insurance for Medicare patients who 
were prescribed AMD drugs.  (Gov’t’s SUF ¶ 9; Walley Dep. Tr. 26:5-27:14).  Originally, the 
AMD fund covered three FDA-approved treatments for wet AMD:  Lucentis, Macugen, and 

Visudyne.  (Def.’s SUF ¶ 18; Walley Decl. ¶ 6).  It did not, however, cover Avastin, which is 
used off-label for the treatment of wet AMD.  (See Def.’s SUF ¶ 9).  In 2011, after Eylea 
received FDA approval, the AMD fund added it as well.  (Def.’s SUF ¶ 19; Walley Decl. ¶ 6). 
Regeneron had no role in establishing the AMD fund.  (Def.’s SUF ¶ 16; Walley Decl. 
¶ 5).  Before 2011, Genentech, the manufacturer of Lucentis and Avastin, was the only 
manufacturer-donor to the AMD fund; it remained its leading donor until the end of 2013.  
(Def.’s SUF ¶ 29; Walley Decl. ¶ 15).  In 2014, Regeneron became the AMD fund’s only 
manufacturer-donor.  (Def.’s SUF ¶ 31; Walley Decl. ¶ 16).  Patients who received copay 
assistance for treatments from the AMD fund were not provided any information from CDF 
about the source of the assistance they received.  (Def.’s SUF ¶ 28; Walley Decl. ¶ 13). 
B.   Procedural Background                                           
As amended, the complaint alleges presentation of false claims in violation of the False 
Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(A) (2009) (Count 1); making or using false records material 
to a false or fraudulent claim in violation of the FCA, 31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(B) (2009) (Count 

2); and unjust enrichment (Count 3).  Essentially, the complaint alleges that Regeneron’s efforts 
to funnel money into CDF specifically to reimburse the copays of Eylea patients violated the 
Anti-Kickback Statute, 42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(b).  The resulting claims to Medicare were 
allegedly tainted by illegal kickbacks in violation of the FCA.           
The government has moved for partial summary judgment on the issues of materiality, 
causation, and damages under the FCA.  Regeneron has moved for summary judgment on all 
counts.                                                                   
II.  Standard of Review                                                   
The role of summary judgment is “to pierce the pleadings and to assess the proof in order 
to see whether there is a genuine need for trial.”  Mesnick v. General Elec. Co., 950 F.2d 816, 

822 (1st Cir. 1991) (quoting Garside v. Osco Drug, Inc., 895 F.2d 46, 50 (1st Cir. 1990)).  
Summary judgment shall be granted when “there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact 
and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a).  A genuine 
issue is “one that must be decided at trial because the evidence, viewed in the light most 
flattering to the nonmovant, would permit a rational factfinder to resolve the issue in favor of 
either party.”  Medina-Munoz v. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., 896 F.2d 5, 8 (1st Cir. 1990) 
(citation omitted).  In evaluating a summary judgment motion, the court indulges all reasonable 
inferences in favor of the nonmoving party.  See O’Connor v. Steeves, 994 F.2d 905, 907 (1st 
Cir. 1993).  When “a properly supported motion for summary judgment is made, the adverse 
party must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.”  Anderson v. 
Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 250 (1986) (quotations omitted).  The nonmoving party may 
not simply “rest upon mere allegation or denials of his pleading,” but instead must “present 
affirmative evidence.”  Id. at 256-57.                                    

III.  Analysis                                                            
A.   Regulatory Framework                                            
The False Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. §§ 3729-33, imposes civil liability for anyone who 
“knowingly presents, or causes to be presented, a false or fraudulent claim for payment or 
approval” or “knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made or used, a false record or statement 
material to a false or fraudulent claim.”  31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(A), (a)(1)(B).  A “claim” is “any 
request or demand . . . for money or property” presented to an officer, employee, or agent of the 
United States.  31 U.S.C. § 3729(b)(2).                                   
The Anti-Kickback Statute, 42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b, states that “[w]hoever knowingly and 
willfully offers or pays any remuneration (including any kickback, bribe, or rebate) directly or 
indirectly, overtly or covertly, in cash or in kind to any person to induce such person . . . to 

purchase . . . or recommend purchasing . . . any good, facility, service, or item for which 
payment may be made in whole or in part under a Federal health care program” shall be guilty of 
a felony.  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(b)(2).                                    
In 2010, Congress amended the AKS to provide that any Medicare claim “that includes 
items or services resulting from a violation of [the AKS] constitutes a false or fraudulent claim 
for purposes of [the FCA].”  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(g); Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act, Pub. L. 111-148, 124 Stat. 119 (2010).  In other words, an “AKS violation that results in a 
federal health care payment is a per se false claim under the FCA.”  Guilfoile v. Shields, 913 F.3d 
178, 190 (1st Cir. 2019) (quoting United States ex rel. Lutz v. United States, 853 F.3d 131, 135 
(4th Cir. 2017)).                                                         
B.   Regeneron’s Motion for Summary Judgment                         
Regeneron has moved for summary judgment on all claims.  As to the claims under the 
FCA, it contends that the government (1) cannot prove a predicate AKS violation; (2) cannot 
show that its donations resulted in the submission of any false Medicare claim; and (3) cannot 

prove that Regeneron had the requisite knowledge and intent.  Regeneron has also moved for 
summary judgment on the unjust-enrichment claim.  Each will be addressed in turn. 
     1.   Whether the Government Can Show an AKS Violation           
The first question is whether the evidence is sufficient to establish a violation of the AKS.  
As noted, that statute makes it illegal to “offer[] or pay[] any remuneration . . . to induce [any] 
person . . . to purchase . . . or recommend purchasing . . . any . . . item for which payment may be 
made in whole or in part under a Federal health care program.”  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(b)(2).  
Liability under the AKS requires an “intent to induce a referral or recommendation”; “[a]n intent 
to induce referrals . . . means an intent ‘to gain influence over the reason or judgment’ of the 
[prescribing] physicians.”  United States v. Medtronic, Inc., 189 F. Supp. 3d 259, 268, 271 (D. 

Mass. 2016) (quoting United States v. McClatchey, 217 F.3d 823, 834 (10th Cir. 2000)).  Put 
another way, “the heartland of what the AKS is intended to prevent [is] the use of payments to 
improperly influence decisions on the provision of health care that lead to claims for payment to 
federal health care programs,” such as Medicare.  Guilfoile, 913 F.3d at 192-93. 
A person or company who offers or pays remuneration to a healthcare provider violates 
the AKS “so long as one purpose of the offer or payment is to induce Medicare or Medicaid 
patient referrals.”  McClatchey, 217 F.3d at 835 (emphasis added).  However, a person or 
company “cannot be convicted merely because [he] hoped or expected or believed that referrals 
may ensue from remuneration that was designed wholly for other purposes.”  Id. at 834.  The 
factfinder must make the “difficult factual determination” of a payor-company’s intent in paying 
or offering remuneration to a healthcare provider:  that is, is the prospect of inducing Medicare-
funded patient referrals the “motivating factor” for the remunerative relationship, or is it simply a 
“collateral hope or expectation”?  Id. at 834 n.7.  The former would subject the payor-company 

to liability under the AKS, while the latter would not.                   
The practice of waiving copays, or making donations to offset the cost of copays, may 
violate the AKS.  Copay discounts or waivers made directly to patients certainly implicate the 
AKS.  The Seventh Circuit has found that a pharmacy’s practice of forgiving the copays of 
Medicare customers, and providing them small gifts (such as tins of caviar), in order to induce 
them to fill their prescriptions there, rather than at competitor pharmacies, was a “kickback” 
under the AKS:                                                            
The fraudulent character of giving discounts or refunds to the pharmacy’s 
customers is less obvious—what is wrong with offering an inducement that 
reduces a product’s cost to the consumer?  The answer is that a discount or refund 
can become a “kickback” . . . because it artificially inflates the price that the 
government pays pharmacies for prescription drugs for Medicare or Medicaid 
beneficiaries . . . The [discount or] refund to the customer would thus have been a 
“kickback” . . . because it would have increased the pharmacy’s sales (and 
presumably its profits, as otherwise it wouldn’t provide refunds) at the 
government’s expense.  It would have had done so either by diverting customers 
from other pharmacies or by inducing customers to purchase drugs that they 
would not have been willing to purchase had they been responsible for the copay. 
United States ex rel. Grenadyor v. Ukrainian Vill. Pharmacy, Inc., 772 F.3d 1102, 1104-05 (7th 
Cir. 2014).                                                               
Similarly, improperly structured donations to copay-assistance charities may violate the 
AKS if they are made with the intent to induce Medicare-funded referrals or drug purchases.  
See, e.g., United States v. Teva Pharms. USA, Inc., 2023 WL 4565105 (D. Mass. July 14, 2023). 
In 2005, the Office of the Inspector General for the Department of Health and Human 
Services (“HHS-OIG”), the agency that administers Medicare, issued a “special advisory 
bulletin” addressing how companies may contribute to copay-assistance programs without 
violating the AKS and FCA.  See HHS-OIG, Special Advisory Bulletin on Patient Assistance 
Programs for Medicare Part D Enrollees, 70 Fed. Reg. 70623 (Nov. 22, 2005).1  The 2005 
bulletin advises that “pharmaceutical manufacturers can donate to bona fide independent charity 

PAPs [patient assistance programs], provided appropriate safeguards exist.”  Id. at 70625.  The 
bulletin contains an illustrative list of such safeguards, stating that a pharmaceutical company’s 
donations to an independent copay-assistance charity “should raise few, if any, anti-kickback 
statute concerns,” as long as:                                            
(i) Neither the pharmaceutical manufacturer nor any affiliate . . . exerts any direct 
or indirect influence or control over the charity or the subsidy program; 

(ii) The charity awards assistance in a truly independent manner that severs any 
link between the pharmaceutical manufacturer’s funding and the beneficiary (i.e., 
the assistance provided to the beneficiary cannot be attributed to the donating 
pharmaceutical manufacturer);                                        

(iii) The charity awards assistance without regard to the pharmaceutical 
manufacturer’s interests and without regard to the beneficiary’s choice of product, 
provider, practitioner, supplier, or Part D drug plan;               

(iv) The charity provides assistance based upon a reasonable, verifiable, and 
uniform measure of financial need that is applied in a consistent manner; and 

(v) The pharmaceutical manufacturer does not solicit or receive data from the 
charity that would facilitate the manufacturer in correlating the amount or 
frequency of its donations with the number of subsidized prescriptions for its 
products.                                                            

Id. at 70626.  It adds in a footnote to section (v):                      
We have previously approved a bona fide independent charity PAP arrangement 
that included only limited reporting of aggregate data to donors in the form of 
monthly or less frequent reports containing aggregate data about the number of 
all applicants for assistance in a disease category and the number of patients 
qualifying for assistance in that disease category . . . Reporting of data that is not 

1 While the bulletin is directed to enrollees of Medicare Part D, the guidance (how to contribute to copay-
assistance foundations without violating the AKS and FCA) is applicable to both Parts B and D. 
in the aggregate or that is patient specific would be problematic, as would 
reporting of any data, whether or not in the aggregate, related to the identity, 
amount, or nature of subsidized drugs.                               

Id. at 70626 n.16.  The bulletin summarizes these safeguards by stating the operative rule or 
criteria for evaluating the legality of donations to PAPs as follows:  “Simply put, the independent 
charity PAP must not function as a conduit for payments by the pharmaceutical manufacturer to 
patients and must not impermissibly influence beneficiaries’ drug choices.”  Id. at 70627. 
As set forth below, here the government has proffered sufficient facts to withstand a 
motion for summary judgment as to whether Regeneron violated the AKS.     
          a.   Remuneration                                          
The first issue is whether the donations by Regeneron to CDF qualify as “remuneration” 
under the AKS.  Regeneron asserts that it had no control over which AMD treatments or patients 
CDF assisted, and that its donations therefore do not fall within the statutory prohibition.  As 
noted, however, “the AKS prohibits even the indirect receipt of prohibited remuneration.”  
United States ex rel. Banigan v. Organon USA Inc., 2016 WL 10704126, at *3 n.8 (D. Mass. 
Aug. 23, 2016).  Here, there is evidence that the promise of copay assistance through CDF 
indirectly provided remuneration to the physicians prescribing Eylea.  Remuneration means 
“anything of value”; the copay assistance eliminates the financial risk to physicians if they 
prescribed a drug for which patients cannot pay.  (See, e.g., Docket No. 247, Ex. 52 (“Miller 
Decl.”) ¶ 4 (“I have to be cognizant of the costs of these drugs; I cannot take on the cost of 
patient balances myself.”); id. at ¶ 5 (“[T]he availability of copay assistance often gives me the 
option to administer Eylea if Eylea is the wet AMD drug that I prefer for a given patient.”)).2  


2 This definition of “remuneration” derives from a 1994 HHS-OIG bulletin:  “In certain cases, a provider, 
practitioner or supplier who routinely waives Medicare copayments or deductibles also could be held liable under 
the Medicare and Medicaid anti-kickback statute.  42 U.S.C. 1320a-7b(b).  The statute makes it illegal to offer, pay, 
Under the circumstances, there is sufficient evidence that the government can prove that the 
donations constituted “remuneration” within the meaning of the AKS.3      
          b.   Inducement of Claims                                  
The second issue is whether the donations constituted an “inducement” to purchase an 
item within the meaning of the AKS.  Regeneron asserts that the structure of CDF made it 

impossible for the donations to “improperly influence” or “impermissibly influence” doctors’ 
and patients’ decision to purchase Eylea.  See Guilfoile, 913 F.3d at 192-93; 70 Fed. Reg. 70627.  
For example, it contends that CDF allocated its AMD grants to patients on a first-come, first-
served basis, and that physicians therefore had no way of knowing whether a patient would 
eventually receive copay assistance from CDF when they made their prescribing decisions. 
However, the record contains evidence suggesting that at least some doctors did know 
about the availability of copay assistance before administering Eylea, and that the expectation of 
copay assistance did, in fact, change their behavior.  (See, e.g., Docket No. 247, Ex. 47 
(“Sarrafizadeh Decl.”) ¶ 4 (“Co-pay assistance for Medicare patients is a huge help in removing 
financial considerations from treatment decisions.  Many Medicare patients with concerns about 

the high cost of co-pays can get branded wet AMD treatment like Eylea because of foundation 
payments.  I am able to prescribe whichever drug I would like to my Medicare patients because I 
know the co-pay foundation will cover or significantly reduce their co-pays for branded drugs.”); 

solicit or receive anything of value as an inducement to generate business payable by Medicare or Medicaid.”  HHS-
OIG, Publication of OIG Special Fraud Alerts, 59 Fed. Reg. 65375 (Dec. 19, 1994) (emphasis added).  
3 There is sufficient evidence that the government can prove that the donations constituted “remuneration” 
within the meaning of the AKS even under the Sixth Circuit’s interpretation of the term in United States ex rel. 
Martin v. Hathaway, 63 F.4th 1043 (6th Cir. 2023).  The court in Martin considered whether renumeration “covers 
just payments and other transfers of value or any act that may be valuable to another.”  Id. at 1048.  The court held 
that the term “renumeration” is limited to “payments and other transfers of value,” reasoning that a broader 
definition both contravenes the “four corners of the statute” and “lacks a coherent end point.”  Id. at 1048, 1050-52.  
In reaching that conclusion, the court found that a hospital’s decision not to hire a particular doctor did not amount 
to an “offer of referrals” to another doctor.  Id. at 1052.               
Docket No. 247, Ex. 48 (“Siegel Decl.”) ¶ 4 (discussing the availability of copay assistance from 
CDF for “many of [her] patients”); Docket No. 247, Ex. 49 (“Khan Decl.”) ¶ 5 (“I typically have 
freedom of choice when prescribing wet AMD drugs to Medicare Part B patients because I know 
the patients will be able to afford the drugs once they receive copay assistance.”); Docket No. 

275, Ex. 72 (“Subramanian Decl.”) ¶¶ 4-5 (“Cost is a consideration for me when recommending 
treatment.  I will not administer Eylea unless the patient’s insurance will cover it or the patient 
receives assistance or wants to pay out of pocket . . . Copay assistance or full payment assistance 
is usually available for my patients.  My understanding is that this assistance comes from 
Regeneron.”)).                                                            
Accordingly, there is sufficient evidence that the remuneration structure “influence[d] 
decisions on the provision of health care,” Guilfoile, 913 F.3d at 193, and thus induced Medicare 
claims for Eylea.                                                         
          c.   Intent to Induce Claims                               
The third question is whether there is evidence that Regeneron had the necessary intent to 
induce purchases of Eylea.  The government has submitted evidence that at least some 

Regeneron employees understood that they were receiving Eylea-specific data from CDF, used 
CDF-provided data to perform ROI calculations that affected the amount of Regeneron’s 
contributions to CDF, and sought to conceal their use of such data from internal auditors. 
For example, William Daniels, who testified that he “was Regeneron’s main point of 
contact to co-pay assistance foundations and managed the relationship between Regeneron and 
those foundations,” stated that he “had been receiving data from CDF that was specific to Eylea” 
and that he used CDF data to perform ROI calculations.  (Docket No. 275, Ex. 3 (“Daniels Dep. 
Tr.”) 11:22-24, 97:5-6).  In addition, there is evidence that Bob Terifay, Regeneron’s former 
Vice President of Commercial, changed an email from Daniels before forwarding it to the 
internal audit team (a change that the government contends was made in order to conceal from 
internal auditors that Regeneron possessed Eylea-specific data from CDF).  (See Docket No. 315, 
Ex. 1).                                                                   
That evidence could support an inference that Regeneron intended to use CDF as a 

conduit to reimburse patients and influence the choices of physicians, and therefore had more 
than a vague “hope or expectation” that Eylea purchases would increase following donations to 
CDF.  See McClatchey, 217 F.3d at 834 n.7.4  Ultimately, intent is a “difficult factual 
determination” that should be left for a jury to decide, rather than the court at the summary-
judgment stage.  See id.                                                  
In summary, viewing the entire record in the light most favorable to the government and 
drawing all reasonable inferences in its favor, there is evidence that Regeneron paid 
remuneration, through donations to CDF, in order to induce physicians to recommend Medicare-
subsidized purchases of its drugs and to induce patients to purchase those drugs.  Accordingly, 
summary judgment will not be granted on the basis that there is insufficient evidence to establish 

a violation of the AKS.                                                   
     2.   Whether the Government Can Show that Regeneron’s Donations 
          Resulted in False Claims                                   
As noted, any claim for Medicare reimbursement “that includes items or services 
resulting from a violation of [the AKS] constitutes a false or fraudulent claim for purposes of 

4 Nor can Regeneron establish at this stage that its intent was categorically proper based on the “safe 
harbor” described in the 2005 HHS-OIG guidance.  Special Advisory Bulletin on Patient Assistance Programs for 
Medicare Part D Enrollees, 70 Fed. Reg. 70623.  The government has proffered some evidence (which Regeneron 
challenges) that Regeneron’s combined donations to CDF in 2013 and 2014 closely tracked the AMD fund’s total 
Eylea assistance during that period, which, in turn, could permit an inference that CDF unlawfully “function[ed] as a 
conduit for payments by the pharmaceutical manufacturer to patients.”  Id. at 70627. 
In addition, given evidence that “[p]atients granted copay assistance for a calendar year did not necessarily 
receive copay assistance during that year,” at this stage, the Court declines to compare the amount of its donations 
and CDF’s assistance only on an annual basis.  (See Docket No. 247, Ex. 22 (“Resnick Report”) at 8 ¶ 19). 
[the FCA].”  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(g) (emphasis added).  In other words, an “AKS violation that 
results in a federal health care payment is a per se false claim under the FCA.”  Guilfoile, 913 
F.3d at 190 (citing Lutz, 853 F.3d at 135).                               
The meaning of the term “resulting from” is not settled, and has led to differing 

interpretations.  See United States ex rel. Fitzer v. Allergan, Inc., 2022 WL 846211 at *9 (D. Md. 
Mar. 22, 2022) (“Courts around the country have struggled to define the standard of causation 
that is required to prove an FCA claim based on an AKS violation.”).  At a minimum, the 
language clearly suggests that there must be a causal relationship of some kind between the AKS 
violation and the medical decision that resulted in the false claim.  To date, the only 
pronouncement by the First Circuit on the question has been in Guilfoile:  “[I]f there is a 
sufficient causal connection between an AKS violation and a claim submitted to the federal 
government, that claim is false within the meaning of the FCA.”  Guilfoile, 913 F.3d at 190 
(citing United States ex rel. Greenfield v. Medco Health Sols., Inc., 880 F.3d 89, 96-98 (3d Cir. 
2018)).                                                                   

The precise requirements of that “sufficient causal connection” are unclear.  Among the 
principal unsettled questions are (1) the legal standard (but-for causation, or some other, less 
demanding, standard); (2) the nature and amount of the evidence that the government must 
present to prove the causal connection; and (3) the extent to which the defendant can offer 
countervailing evidence of a lack of causation.                           
Before turning to an analysis of the caselaw, there are two threshold questions.  The first 
is whether the Third Circuit’s decision in Greenfield is effectively binding on this Court.  
According to the government, it is, because the First Circuit cited that decision in Guilfoile for 
the proposition that there must be “a sufficient causal connection” between the violation and the 
submitted claim.  Id.  It is true that the court in Guilfoile cited—although it did not discuss— 
Greenfield.  But the court expressly disclaimed making a decision on the “full implications” of 
the statute, and did not elaborate on what it meant by a “sufficient causal connection.”  Id. 5  The 
court explained that engaging in such an analysis would be superfluous, as the issue facing the 

court was “not the standard for proving an FCA violation based on the AKS, but rather the 
requirements for pleading an FCA retaliation claim.”  Id.6  Under the circumstances, this Court 
does not find Greenfield, or the causation standard set forth in that opinion, to be binding. 7 
The second question is whether this Court is bound by its own earlier decision in this 
case, issued December 4, 2020, denying Regeneron’s motion to dismiss.  Again, the answer to 
that question is no.  That opinion did address the issue of causation, but at a relatively superficial 
level; moreover, that discussion was not informed by the opinion of the Eighth Circuit in United 
States ex rel. Cairns v. D.S. Med. LLC, 42 F.4th 828 (8th Cir. 2022), and the Sixth Circuit in in 
United States ex rel. Martin v. Hathaway, 63 F.4th 1043 (6th Cir. 2023), neither of which had yet 
been issued.  United States v. Regeneron Pharms., Inc., 2020 WL 7130004, at *14-15 (D. Mass. 

Dec. 4, 2020).  Furthermore, and in any event, that decision was an interlocutory order, which is 
subject to reconsideration at any point.8  This Court will therefore consider the causation issue 

5 The Guilfoile court noted:  “We have previously declined to directly address the impact of § 1320a-7b(g) 
on FCA actions, see Hutcheson, 647 F.3d at 379 n.1, and we do not attempt to assess the full implications of the 
AKS provision today.”  Guilfoile, 880 F.3d at 190.                        

6 That distinction is potentially significant, because pleading a retaliation claim under the FCA “does not 
require adequately pleading the submission of a false claim or meeting the Rule 9(b) standards for pleading fraud.”  
Guilfoile, 880 F.3d at 189.  Plaintiffs who allege retaliation must only “plausibly plead a reasonable amount of 
smoke — conduct that could reasonably lead to an FCA action based on the submission of a false claim.”  Id. 

7 At least two other courts in this district, however, have concluded that Guilfoile counsels following 
Greenfield.  See Teva, 2023 WL 4565105, at *5 (D. Mass. July 14, 2023) (quoting United States ex rel. Bawduniak 
v. Biogen Idec Inc., 2022 WL 2438971, at *2 (D. Mass. July 5, 2022)).  The Bawduniak court, however, 
acknowledged that the “First Circuit's analysis may not be binding.”  Bawduniak, 2022 WL 2438971, at *2.  

8 The doctrine of law of the case is not implicated, because ‘[i]nterlocutory orders, including denials of 
motions to dismiss, remain open to trial court reconsideration, and do not constitute the law of the case.’”  Harlow v. 
anew, without being bound by its prior ruling.                            
To date, there are three circuit opinions directly addressing the meaning of the term 
“resulting from a violation.”  See Greenfield, 880 F.3d at 96-100; Cairns, 42 F.4th at 834-37; 
Martin, 63 F.4th at 1052-55.  As set forth below, those three opinions adopt two different 

approaches.                                                               
In Greenfield, 880 F.3d 89, the Third Circuit rejected a standard that would require proof 
“that federal beneficiaries would not have used the relevant services absent the alleged kickback 
scheme.”  Id. at 100.  The court did not perform a textual analysis of the term “resulting from,” 
or consider how that phrase had been interpreted in other contexts.  Instead, it concluded that a 
requirement of but-for causation “would dilute the False Claims Act’s requirements vis-à-vis the 
Anti-Kickback Statute, as direct causation would be a precondition to bringing a False Claims 
Act case but not an Anti-Kickback Statute case.”  Id. at 97.  It further reasoned that such a 
standard would be inconsistent with the intentions of the drafters of the AKS, who sought “to 
strengthen the capability of the Government to detect, prosecute, and punish fraudulent activities 

under the [M]edicare and [M]edicaid programs.”  Id. at 96 (quoting H.R. Rep. No. 95-393, at 1 
(1977)).  As a result, it concluded that the legislative history suggests that a but-for causation 
standard was not required.  Id. at 96-98.                                 
Instead, the Greenfield court determined that the phrase “resulting from” requires the 
plaintiff (there, a relator) to prove only “a link between the alleged kickbacks and the medical 
care received.”  Id. at 100 (emphasis added).  Such a plaintiff need not “show that a kickback 

Children’s Hosp., 432 F.3d 50, 55 (1st Cir. 2005) (quoting Perez-Ruiz v. Crespo-Guillen, 25 F.3d 40, 42 (1st Cir. 
1994)); see also Daumont-Colón v. Cooperativa de Ahorro y Crédito de Caguas, 982 F.3d 20, 26 (1st Cir. 2020) 
(“[T]he Civil Rules authorize district courts to revise their own orders and decisions at any time before entering final 
judgment.” (citing Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(b))).                               
directly influenced a patient's decision to use a particular medical provider,” but must 
demonstrate “some connection between a kickback and a subsequent reimbursement claim.”  Id. 
at 97, 100.9  The court expressly rejected the “taint” theory proposed by the relator, stating that 
“the taint of a kickback” does not “render[] every reimbursement claim false.”  Id. at 100.  

Instead, it concluded that a kickback will not “morph into a false claim unless a particular patient 
is exposed to an illegal recommendation or referral and a provider submits a claim for 
reimbursement pertaining to that patient.”  Id.10                         
In Cairns, 42 F.4th 828, the Eighth Circuit declined to follow Greenfield, and instead 
held that “when a plaintiff seeks to establish falsity or fraud through the 2010 amendment, it 
must prove that a defendant would not have included particular ‘items or services’ but for the 
illegal kickbacks.”  Id. at 836.                                          
The court approached the issue as one of statutory interpretation.  It began by observing 
that “[w]hen a statute is unambiguous, interpretation both begins and ends with the text.”  Id. at 
834 (citing Food Mktg. Inst. v. Argus Leader Media, 139 S.Ct. 2356 (2019)).  It then noted that 

the Supreme Court had interpreted “a nearly identical phrase, ‘results from,’ in the Controlled 
Substances Act” in Burrage v. United States, 571 U.S. 204 (2014).  Id.  There, the Supreme 
Court interpreted the phrase “results from” in that Act to require but-for causation.  See Burrage, 
571 U.S. at 212 (“Where there is no textual or contextual indication to the contrary, courts 
regularly read phrases like ‘results from’ to require but-for causality.”).  Because that but-for 

9 The court concluded that establishing “temporal proximity” between the kickbacks and the submission of 
claims, without more, is not enough.  Id. at 100.                         
10 Although as yet there are no other circuit opinions following Greenfield, the opinion has been followed 
by other district courts outside of Massachusetts.  See, e.g., United States v. Teva Pharms. USA, Inc., 2019 WL 
13244248, at *2-3 (S.D.N.Y. Apr. 11, 2019); Fitzer, 2022 WL 846211 at *9; Kuzma v. N. Arizona Healthcare 
Corp., 2022 WL 2159027, at *10 (D. Ariz. June 15, 2022); United States ex. rel. Wallace v. Exactech, Inc., 2020 
WL 4500493, at *19 (N.D. Ala. Aug. 5, 2020).                              
causation standard is the “default” or “background” rule against which Congress legislates, and 
because there are no textual indications to the contrary in the 2010 amendments, the court 
declined to consider legislative history and the drafters’ purported intentions.  Cairns, 42 F.4th at 
835-36.                                                                   

Like the Greenfield court, the Cairns court expressly rejected the “taint” theory proposed 
by the government.  Id. at 835.  The government had argued that “all that is required is that the 
illegal kickbacks ‘tainted’ the ‘claim[] for goods or services’ or the anti-kickback ‘violation itself 
may have been a contributing factor.’”  Id.  The court observed:          
These alternative standards, however, are hardly causal at all.  A ‘taint’ could 
occur without the illegal kickbacks motivating the inclusion of any of the ‘items 
or services.’  Similarly, asking the jury if a violation ‘may have been a 
contributing factor’ does not establish anything more than a mere possibility. 

Id.  It further observed that as a matter of statutory construction, the phrase “resulting from” is 
“unambiguously causal,” and therefore it was unnecessary to substitute a different causal 
standard when Congress itself had not done so.  Id. at 836.  It noted that if Congress intended to 
codify an expanded understanding of AKS enforcement in the 2010 amendments, “it could have 
selected different language.”  Id.                                        
Most recently, in Martin, 63 F.4th 1043, the Sixth Circuit followed Cairns and adopted a 
but-for causation standard, reasoning that “[w]here a statute ‘yields a clear answer, judges must 
stop.’”  Id. at 1053 (quoting Argus Leader Media, 139 S.Ct. 2356, 2364 (2019)).  The court noted 
that “[t]he ordinary meaning of ‘resulting from’ is but-for causation,” and legislative history does 
not “overcome the ordinary meaning of the text.”  Id. at 1052-53.  In addition, it observed that 
“we generally do not consider legislative history in construing a statute with criminal 
applications, the idea being that no one should be imprisoned based on a document or statement 
that never received the full support of Congress and was presented to the president for 
signature.”  Id. at 1054.11  And it cautioned that “reading causation too loosely” would mean that 
“[m]uch of the workaday practice of medicine might fall within an expansive interpretation of 
the Anti-Kickback Statute.”  Id. at 1054.  A looser theory of causation would fail to “protect 
doctors of good intent, sweeping in the vice-ridden and virtuous alike.”  Id.  A standard of but-

for causation, on the other hand, “still leaves plenty of room to target genuine corruption.”  Id. at 
1055.  Accordingly, the court granted a motion to dismiss where there was “not one claim for 
reimbursement identified with particularity in this case that would not have occurred anyway.”  
Id. at 1053.  (“[T]he alleged scheme did not change anything.”).          
Here, the government acknowledges that it has the burden of proving some form of 
causal connection.  In substance, it contends that the “exposure” theory set forth in Greenfield is 
correct:  that is, once it has proved that an AKS violation occurred, all that is required to prove a 
causal link is that “a particular patient is exposed to an illegal recommendation or referral and a 
provider submits a claim for reimbursement pertaining to that patient.”  Greenfield, 880 F.3d at 
100.  According to the government, proof of but-for causation is not required, and evidence that 

a kickback actually influenced (or did not influence) a physician’s medical judgment is 
irrelevant.  Regeneron, in turn, contends in substance that a “but-for” causation standard should 
apply, and that the government bears the burden of proving that an AKS violation occurred and 
that the remuneration actually caused the physician to provide different medical treatment (and 
thus caused the false claims).                                            


11 In a discussion earlier in the opinion concerning the term “remuneration,” the Martin court observed: 
Recall that the same language creates civil and criminal liability.  In the context of dual-application statutes 
like this one, we give the same interpretation to the same words, whether applied in a civil or criminal 
setting.  That means that, if ambiguity exists over the meaning of a provision, the rule of lenity favors a 
narrower definition.                                                 
63 F.4th at 1050.                                                         
In the court’s view, the standard set forth in Greenfield is fraught with problems.  To 
begin, and as the Cairns and Martin courts observed, that standard is divorced from the actual 
language of the statute and from basic principles of statutory interpretation.  It is likewise 
disconnected from long-standing common-law principles of causation.12  As a result, and 

because the standard uses a term (“exposed”) that is not set forth in the statute and is not part of a 
familiar common-law framework, its meaning is unclear and its application in specific factual 
contexts is uncertain.  A simple hypothetical will help to illustrate the point. 
Suppose a doctor has two options for treating a patient with a particular condition:  
product A or product B.  Each year for several years, she writes 50 prescriptions for A and 50 for 
B.  One year, she receives unlawful remuneration from the manufacturer of A, and her 
prescriptions that year rise to 75 for A and drop to 25 for B.  If permitted (and, presumably, 
immunized), she would testify that based on her medical judgment, and in the absence of any 
remuneration, that year she would have written 65 for A and 35 for B.  All the prescriptions 
resulted in Medicare claims.                                              

How many false claims “result[ed] from” that AKS violation?  If the standard is but-for 
causation, and the doctor’s testimony is both permitted and credited, the answer is likely 10 (75 

12 In Universal Health Services v. U.S. ex rel. Escobar, 579 U.S. 176 (2016), the Supreme Court held that a 
theory of implied false certification could provide a basis for liability under the FCA.  In doing so, the Court 
examined the principles of common-law fraud.  It wrote:                   
Congress did not define what makes a claim “false” or “fraudulent.”  But it is a settled principle of 
interpretation that, absent other indication, Congress intends to incorporate the well-settled meaning of the 
common-law terms it uses.  And the term “fraudulent” is a paradigmatic example of a statutory term that 
incorporates the common-law meaning of fraud.                        
Escobar, 579 U.S. 176, at 187 (citation omitted).                         
The Seventh Circuit in United States v. Luce drew upon that reasoning to find that “nothing in the FCA 
contains any indication of an intent to depart from the common-law understanding of causation in fraud cases.”  
United States v. Luce, 873 F.3d 999, 1012 (7th Cir. 2017).  While Luce does not concern the language from the AKS 
at issue in this case, the opinion highlights the principle that Congress is presumed to incorporate well-settled 
judicial interpretations of terms when it enacts legislation.             
minus 65).  If the standard is but-for causation, and the doctor’s testimony is not permitted or not 
credited, the answer is likely 25 (75 minus 50).  If the standard is “taint” (that is, once the 
government has proved that the unlawful remuneration occurred, all of the prescriptions written 
by the doctor for A must be deemed to have resulted in false claims), the answer is 75.13   

But what if the standard is “exposure”?  Again, the Greenfield court expressly rejected 
both a but-for causation standard, 880 F.3d at 96, and a “taint” standard, id. at 100.  In the 
hypothetical, what is the number of claims in which patients were “exposed” to an AKS 
violation?  If the answer is 75, what is the difference between the rejected “taint” standard and 
the permitted “exposure” standard?  If the answer is more or less than 75, what is the analytic 
process that leads to that result?                                        
The Greenfield opinion also effectively bars the defendant from contesting the 
government’s evidence of causation once an AKS violation is proved.  As noted, the court 
concluded that because the government need only prove a “link” between the violation and the 
claim (which, again, it defined as an “exposure’), it is not necessary for the government to prove 

actual causation—that is, that the AKS violation actually caused the provision of the medical 
services that led to the false claim.  Id. at 98, 100.                    
Following Greenfield, another judge in this district described the standard as follows: 
[A] claim is false if it seeks reimbursement for a prescription that was not 
provided in compliance with the Anti-Kickback Statute, regardless of whether the 
claim was the result of a quid-pro-quo exchange or would have been submitted 
even absent the kickback.  See Greenfield, 880 F.3d at 96.  Relators need not 
show that a quid pro quo exchange occurred, or that the physicians would not 
have prescribed Defendant’s medication but for the kickbacks.  It is sufficient to 
show that Defendant paid kickbacks to a physician for the purpose of inducing the 

13 Of course, the matter becomes considerably more complicated once other variables are introduced, such 
as multiple physicians and multiple patients with differing medical circumstances.  The matching of the 
remuneration from the manufacturer to the physician may also be quite difficult, particularly where (as here) the 
alleged remuneration was indirect, more than one manufacturer is potentially involved, and there are temporal and 
other variables that make one-to-one tracing challenging as an evidentiary matter. 
physician to prescribe specific drugs, and that the physician then prescribed those 
drugs, even if the physician would have prescribed those drugs absent the 
kickback.                                                            

United States ex rel. Bawduniak v. Biogen Idec, Inc., 2018 WL 1996829, at *3 (D. Mass. Apr. 
27, 2018).  Thus, under Greenfield, it is “sufficient” for the government to prove that a kickback 
was paid to a physician and the physician then prescribed the product.    
Greenfield, however, went further, and concluded that the intent of the prescribing 
physician and the treated patient are necessarily irrelevant.  880 F.3d at 98.  It is by no means 
obvious that such an approach is correct.  The Court need not decide that issue for purposes of 
the present motion; nonetheless, it is reasonable to ask why the defendant could never be 
permitted to put on any evidence, from any source, suggesting that a particular referral or 
treatment was not actually caused by the AKS violation.  Indeed, if that is correct, an AKS 
violation could lead to liability even if all of the prescribing physicians were unaware of the 
violation, and even if the violation did not cause a single additional referral or prescription.  If 
nothing else, it is unclear how such an inducement “resulted in” any false claims.  Proof of a 
“link” thus becomes akin to an irrebuttable presumption:  it leads to liability even if the facts 
show no actual causation of any kind.14                                   
In any event, in the Court’s view, the statutory construction analysis set forth in Cairns 
and Martin is persuasive.  The adoption by Congress of the “resulting from” language in the 
statute requires a finding that the appropriate standard is but-for causation, and the Court will 
follow that approach here.                                                


14 As this Court noted in United States ex rel. Flanagan v. Fresenius Med. Care Holdings, Inc., another 
possible approach might be to adopt a burden-shifting framework; once the government has proved a prima facie 
case of causation, the burden would shift to the defendant to prove the contrary.  Flanagan, 2022 WL 17417577, at 
*18 (D. Mass. Dec. 5, 2022).                                              
It does not necessarily follow, however, that the government’s burden is thereby made 
insuperably difficult.  To begin, under tort law, but-for causation does not normally require that 
an actor be the sole factual cause of a harm.  See, e.g., Bostock v. Clayton County, 140 S.Ct. 
1731, 1739 (2020) (“[O]ften, events have multiple but-for causes.”).  Under traditional 

principles, a negligent act will satisfy the but-for causation requirement if it was a “substantial 
factor in bringing about” the harm.  Bernier v. Boston Edison Co., 380 Mass. 372, 386 (1980); 
see Tritsch v. Boston Edison Co., 363 Mass. 179, 182 (1973); Falvey v. Hamelburg, 347 Mass. 
430, 435 (1964).15   It is thus likely that the government will not need to prove that the AKS 
violation was the only cause of the resulting false claim.                
As to the quantum of evidence necessary to prove a violation, the government is not 
required in a civil case to adduce proof beyond a reasonable doubt.  Under a preponderance 
standard, it need only prove that it was more likely than not that the AKS violation was the cause 
of the false claim.  And the government, like any litigant, is entitled to attempt to prove its case 
through circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences.  It cannot do so through speculation 

or conjecture (for example, by arguing that there “must have been” a false claim resulting from 
the AKS violation), but its proof need not be beyond all possible doubt.  And the Court sees no 
reason why its evidence may not, in the right circumstances, include proof of temporal 
proximity—although, as in any case where causation is proved in that manner, it may not be 
sufficient, and the reasonableness of the inference may be attenuated as the time period grows 
longer.  See Greenfield, 880 F.3d at 100 (stating that proof of temporal proximity is not enough 


15 The Supreme Judicial Court has recently criticized the term “substantial contributing cause,” calling it 
“confusing” and identifying the standard “proposed in the Restatement (Third) for multiple sufficient cause cases” 
as a more favorable alternative.  Doull v. Foster, 487 Mass. 1, 17-18 (2021).  Nevertheless, it remains true that there 
can be “multiple, simultaneously operating, sufficient causes” of a harm.  Id. at 18. 
to show the requisite “link”); Martin, 63 F.4th at 1053 (stating that “[t]emporal proximity by 
itself does not show causation, and seven months would create few inferences of cause and effect 
anyway.”).                                                                
With that framework in mind, the question then becomes whether the government here 

has proffered sufficient evidence to establish but-for causation.  The government has submitted a 
report from Ian Dew, who analyzed CDF disbursement data in conjunction with Medicare claims 
data and performed a “matching” analysis identifying Medicare claims for which CDF paid some 
or all of the beneficiary’s copay.  (See Gov’t’s SUF ¶¶ 20-21).16  In order to perform that 
analysis, Dew “filtered the Medicare claims to include only those that list a Wet AMD diagnosis 
code” and “filtered the CDF disbursements to include only those disbursements from CDF’s Wet 
AMD fund.”  (Id., Ex. 10 at 1).  He found that “115,192 Medicare claims in 2013 and 2014 had 
part or all of the beneficiary copayment covered by one or more CDF disbursements, and these 
claims resulted in reimbursements of $68,029,431 to providers.”  (Id. at 7).  
In addition, the government points to other evidence that physicians would not have 

submitted claims for Eylea absent the co-pay subsidies.  The price of Avastin, an alternative 
therapy, was dramatically lower than the price of Eylea, and it is surely true that physicians and 
patients alike would take the out-of-pocket cost of a drug into account when making medical 
decisions.  That would be particularly likely here, where Eylea was a buy-and-bill drug that 
would leave the physician’s practice bearing the cost of any unpaid copay obligations. 
Regeneron contends that Dew’s analysis cannot prove a causal “link” between its 
donations and Medicare claims, because he only “matched” disbursements from CDF to Eylea 


16 Regeneron disputes that Dew accurately analyzed that data and determined the Medicare claims for 
which CDF paid some or all of the beneficiary’s copays.                   
patients.  He did so, it asserts, despite evidence that CDF had multiple donors and a surplus of 
funds from another donor at that time.  Thus, according to Regeneron, his analysis proves 
nothing more than “temporal proximity” between the donations and the Medicare claims, which 
Greenfield concluded was insufficient to establish causation.  See 880 F.3d at 100.17   

A similar argument, however, was rejected by another court in this district.  See United 
States v. Teva Pharms. USA, Inc., 560 F. Supp. 3d 412, 422 (D. Mass. 2021) (“Teva’s assertion 
that the government cannot link its donations to specific false claims because other donors 
contributed to the relevant MS funds is unpersuasive.”); see Teva, 2023 WL 4565105, at *3 (D. 
Mass. July 14, 2023) (considering matched-claims analysis of Ian Dew in rejecting defendant’s 
motion for summary judgment as to causation under the FCA).               
The government also contends that Regeneron’s claim of a “surplus” is “misleading” as 
to 2013 and “grossly deceptive” as to 2014; among other things, it notes that Regeneron’s expert 
witness improperly used an end-of-year figure for 2013 of $33 million and a beginning-of-year 
figure for 2014 of $65 million, even though the two figures should have been identical.  (Gov’t 

Opp. at 25-26).                                                           
Based on the record before the Court, it cannot conclude that the government’s evidence, 
including Dew’s analysis, is so flawed or incomplete as to every alleged false claim that 
judgment must necessarily enter for Regeneron.  Resolving all doubts in favor of the government 
as the non-moving party, and construing the evidence in the light most favorable to it, the factual 



17 Regeneron further contends that because Dew testified that he was not expressing an opinion on 
causation, his analysis cannot establish a causal link.  (See Docket No. 261, Ex. 4 (“Dew Dep. Tr.”) 78:12-21).  
Because an expert’s role is to provide opinions on evidence—not on legal concepts such as causation under the AKS 
and FCA—his testimony does not change the Court’s conclusion.             
evidence is sufficient to withstand summary judgment on the issue of causation.  See O’Connor, 
994 F.2d at 907.                                                          
     3.   Whether Regeneron Lacked the Requisite Scienter Under the FCA 
Regeneron next contends that the government cannot establish a knowing violation of the 
FCA because it lacks evidence that the relevant decisionmaker at Regeneron—the CEO, Dr. 
Schleifer—“knowingly” caused the submission of false claims.18            

As a general matter, a corporation is bound by the acts of its employees acting within the 
scope of their employment.  United States v. Bank of New England, N.A., 821 F.2d 844, 856 (1st 
Cir. 1987).19  That principle applies to claims arising under the AKS and the FCA.  See United 
States v. O’Connell, 890 F.2d 563, 568 (1st Cir. 1989) (explaining that the FCA does not 
“contain[] language that would preclude, or has a purpose that would not be served by, applying 
vicarious liability”).  Thus, the relevant scienter is not limited to that of the CEO (who, of course, 
may well have been deceived by his employees); if a single employee of Regeneron had the 
requisite knowledge and intent, that is sufficient.20                     


18 To the extent Regeneron originally asserted that it lacked the requisite scienter because its conduct was 
consistent with an objectively reasonable interpretation of the law, that argument appears to have been foreclosed by 
the Supreme Court’s recent decision in United States ex rel. Schutte v. SuperValu Inc., 143 S.Ct. 1391 (2023) 
(holding that the FCA’s scienter element refers to the defendant’s knowledge and subjective beliefs, not what an 
objectively reasonable person might have known or believed).              
19 Under the “collective knowledge” doctrine, the “knowledge” attributable to a corporation is the sum of 
all of the knowledge possessed by all of its employees, regardless of their position.  See Bank of New England, 821 
F.2d at 856.  For purposes of establishing scienter under the FCA, however, the “collective knowledge” doctrine 
does not apply.  See, e.g., Banigan, 2016 WL 10704126, at *5 (D. Mass. Aug. 23, 2016) (“Courts within the First 
Circuit require at least one individual within a corporate entity to have acted knowingly . . . .”); see also United 
States v. Science Applications Int’l Corp., 626 F.3d 1257, 1274 (D.C. Cir. 2010) (“[U]nder the FCA, ‘collective 
knowledge’ provides an inappropriate basis for proof of scienter because it effectively imposes liability, complete 
with treble damages and substantial civil penalties, for a type of loose constructive knowledge that is inconsistent 
with the Act’s language, structure, and purpose.”).                       
20 To the extent the language in United States ex rel. Dyer v. Raytheon Co., 2013 WL 5348571 (D. Mass. 
Sept. 23, 2013) could be read to suggest that ordinary principles of vicarious liability do not apply in FCA cases, the 
Court will decline to adopt that position.                                
Here, as noted, there is evidence that certain Regeneron employees believed that they 
were improperly receiving Eylea-specific data from CDF and sought to hide that information 
from internal auditors.21  That is evidence from which a reasonable inference could be drawn that 
those employees knew about the remuneration and understood that it was wrongful.  

Accordingly, and under the circumstances, there is sufficient evidence to defeat summary 
judgment on the issue of scienter.                                        
     4.   Unjust Enrichment                                          
Regeneron has also moved for summary judgment on the unjust-enrichment claim, 
contending that the government should be limited to the remedy Congress authorized in the 
FCA.  The Court agrees.                                                   
“[A] party with an adequate remedy at law cannot claim unjust enrichment.”  Shaulis v. 
Nordstrom, Inc., 865 F.3d 1, 16 (1st Cir. 2017).  In addition, “[i]t is the availability of a remedy 
at law, not the viability of that remedy, that prohibits a claim for unjust enrichment.”  Id.  
Accordingly, courts in this district have routinely dismissed unjust-enrichment claims under 
similar facts to those presented here.  See, e.g., Teva, 560 F. Supp. 3d at 423-24 (dismissing 

unjust-enrichment count “[b]ecause an adequate remedy at law exists in the government’s FCA 
claims”); United States ex rel. Martino-Fleming v. South Bay Mental Health Ctrs., 540 F. Supp. 
3d 103, 133 (D. Mass. May 19, 2021) (same).  Accordingly, summary judgment will be granted 
as to the claim of unjust enrichment.                                     



21 Regeneron disputes that its employees were receiving Eylea-specific information from CDF.  However, 
the Court need not resolve that issue at this stage, because “[t]he FCA’s scienter element refers to [defendant’s] 
knowledge and subjective beliefs.”  SuperValu, 143 S.Ct. at 1399; see also id. at 1400 (“[T]he FCA’s standards 
focus primarily on what [defendant] thought and believed.”).  As noted, the government has put forth evidence that 
at least some employees subjectively believed that they were receiving Eylea-specific data. 
C.   The Government’s Motion for Partial Summary Judgment            
The government has moved for partial summary judgment on (1) the materiality of 
violations of the AKS under the FCA; (2) the legal standard for FCA causation for claims 
“resulting from” AKS violations; and (3) the minimum amount of damages that Regeneron owes, 
should the government prove that it violated the FCA.                     

     1.   Materiality                                                
The government contends that healthcare claims that include items or services resulting 
from kickbacks in violation of the AKS are per se materially false for purposes of the FCA.  The 
Court agrees.                                                             
As noted, the 2010 amendment to the AKS clarified that any Medicare claim “that 
includes items or services resulting from a violation of [the AKS] constitutes a false or 
fraudulent claim for purposes of [the FCA].”  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(g); see also Guilfoile, 913 
F.3d at 190 (“We further read the AKS amendment as obviating the need for a plaintiff to plead 
materiality—that is, to plead that compliance with the AKS was material to the government’s 
decision to pay any specific claim.”).  Accordingly, “a violation of the AKS is per se a violation 

of the False Claims Act,” and the government need not prove materiality.  Bawduniak, 2022 WL 
2438971, at *1-2.                                                         
It does not follow, however, that summary judgment will be granted to the government as 
to any claim asserted in the complaint.  The government must still prove that the AKS was 
violated; the fact that its burden of proof is made easier by the 2010 amendment does not entitle 
it, without more, to summary judgment.                                    
     2.   Causation                                                  
The government has moved for summary judgment on the issue of causation, contending 
that it need only show under the Greenfield standard of “exposure” a “sufficient causal 
connection” between Regeneron’s contributions to CDF and the resulting copay-assisted Eylea 
claims that Medicare reimbursed.  For the reasons set forth above, the Court disagrees, and 
concludes that the government must prove but-for causation.  Accordingly, the government’s 
motion for summary judgment as to causation will be denied.               

     3.   Damages                                                    
Finally, the government contends that if it establishes at trial that Regeneron violated the 
FCA, the Court should award damages in the amount of at least $195,800,553—that is, the 
amount the government asserts is the trebled value of the claims it contends were tainted by 
improper copay assistance.22                                              
As a general matter, courts do not entertain motions for partial summary judgment on 
damages where a party’s liability has not yet been determined.  See, e.g., Marshall Contractors, 
Inc. v. Peerless Ins. Co., 827 F. Supp. 91, 93 (D.R.I. 1993) (finding that confronting damages 
questions on summary judgment before liability is established “may be a waste of judicial 
time”); Boden v. St. Elizabeth Med. Ctr., Inc., 2018 WL 4855210, at *4 (E.D. Ky. Oct. 5, 2018) 
(denying motion as premature where movant attempted to “sidestep the crucial issue in this case” 

and place “the Court in the untenable position of being asked to render an advisory opinion on a 
hypothetical determination of critical facts”); Robson v. Duckpond Ltd., 2021 WL 1222429, at *8 
(E.D. Mo. Mar. 31, 2021) (holding that partial summary judgment on damages claims “would 
constitute an improper advisory opinion”).23                              


22 Dew calculated that Regeneron would be liable for at least $65,266,851 in single damages, which, if 
trebled, would amount to $195,800,553.  (See Gov’t’s SUF ¶ 26).           
23 Of course, motions for summary judgment as to damages are not barred in all circumstances.  See, e.g., 
Rudy v. City of Lowell, 777 F. Supp. 2d 255, 259 (D. Mass. 2011); O’Brien v. Town of Agawam, 440 F. Supp. 2d 3, 
8 (D. Mass. 2006).  However, in most cases where courts have granted such a motion, the parties did not “dispute 
the facts or the defendant’s liability.”  See Rudy, 777 F. Supp. 2d at 259; see also City of New York v. Golden 
Although the critical questions in this case—whether Regeneron violated the AKS and 
caused the submission of false claims for payment to Medicare—remain undecided, the 
government has asked the Court to rule on the minimum amount of damages assuming, as a 
hypothetical, that the violations of the AKS and FCA are conclusively established.24  Although 

the Court acknowledges the benefits of resolving matters prior to trial, it is not convinced that 
judicial economy is served by ruling on hypothetical issues that may never have to be addressed.  
It will therefore deny the motion.                                        
IV.  Conclusion                                                           
For the foregoing reasons, the motion of the United States for partial summary judgment 
is DENIED, and the motion for summary judgment of defendant Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, 
Inc., is GRANTED as to the unjust-enrichment claim, and otherwise DENIED. 
So Ordered.                                                               

                           /s/ F. Dennis Saylor IV                   
                           F. Dennis Saylor IV                       
                           Chief Judge, United States District Court 

Dated:  September 27, 2023                                                




Feather Smoke Shop, Inc., 2013 WL 3187049, at *33 (E.D.N.Y. June 20, 2013) (“A court may grant summary 
judgment as to damages following a determination on liability . . . .”) (emphasis added)). 
24 This case is therefore unlike Teva, where the court granted summary judgment on the proper standard for 
measuring damages.  See Teva, 2023 WL 4565105, at *5-6 (“[T]he Court will measure damages in this case as the 
entirety of the government’s payments for the claims resulting from the illegal kickbacks.”).  As the government 
acknowledged at oral argument, it had not previously sought summary judgment on the legal standard for damages, 
but rather the minimum amount of damages.  (Docket No. 339 (“Hearing Tr.”) at 78).

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
               DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                              

_______________________________________                                   
                            )                                         
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,       )                                         
                            )                                         
      Plaintiff,            )       Civil Action No.                  
                            )       20-11217-FDS                      
 v.                         )                                         
                            )                                         
REGENERON PHARMACEUTICALS,      )                                         
INC.,                           )                                         
                            )                                         
      Defendant.            )                                         
_______________________________________)                                  


ORDER ON DEFENDANT’S OBJECTIONS TO THE MAGISTRATE JUDGE’S ORDER           
ON THE MOTION OF THE UNITED STATES FOR A PROTECTIVE ORDER             
SAYLOR, C.J.                                                              
 After a hearing, and upon review of the memoranda filed by the parties and the 
attachments thereto, the objections of defendant Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., to the 
Magistrate Judge’s order on the motion of the United States for a protective order (Docket No. 
186, filed under seal) dated August 1, 2022, are DENIED in part and GRANTED in part, and the 
order of the Magistrate Judge is affirmed in part and reversed in part, as set forth below. 
 This is a civil suit alleging violations of the False Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. § 3729, and 
unjust enrichment predicated on violations of the Anti-Kickback Statute, 42 U.S.C. § 1320a-
7b(b).  The present dispute arises out of the actions of a former Assistant United States Attorney 
who, in 2018, was lead counsel in the investigation that ultimately led to this proceeding.  On 
January 25, 2018, in the course of that investigation, the AUSA and others met with counsel for 
Regeneron.  According to the government, at that meeting, corporate counsel made certain 
factual admissions concerning the conduct of its employees that are relevant to this case. 
 This lawsuit was then filed on June 24, 2020.  The AUSA left government employment 
for private practice in April 2021.                                       
 At some point, the government identified the now-former AUSA as a potential witness, 
based on his participation in the January 2018 meeting.1  Counsel for Regeneron then took his 

deposition, which occurred on April 20, 2022.                             
 In the course of that deposition, the former AUSA testified that in February 2021, he had 
downloaded a variety of files and materials from his government computer system in anticipation 
of leaving his position and going into private practice.  He testified, in substance, that his 
purpose in doing so was to have various model and sample documents to assist him in his legal 
practice.  Among those documents were ones concerning this case.  Administrators at the 
Department of Justice apparently were alerted to the download, and he was advised that it was 
unauthorized and therefore improper.  On February 12, 2021, he executed an affidavit stating 
that he had deleted the downloaded files and that they had not been disseminated any further. 
 As noted, Regeneron was able to depose the former AUSA as to that topic, although not 

to the extent it desired.  It now seeks substantial additional discovery, including interrogatories 
and requests for production of documents, concerning the incident.  The government has moved 
for a protective order precluding that discovery.                         
 Following a hearing on July 18, 2022, at which the Magistrate Judge took the motion for 
a protective order under advisement, the government provided certain additional information 
concerning the matter to the court and counsel for Regeneron in a letter dated July 25, 2022.  The 
Magistrate Judge then issued her order on August 1, 2022.  (Docket No. 186). 


 1 It appears that the former AUSA may have participated in one or more subsequent meetings addressing 
the same or similar topics.  For the sake of simplicity, the Court will treat it as a single meeting. 
 In substance, Magistrate Judge Dein concluded that the government should be required to 
provide defense counsel with a summary of the contents of the affidavit that was submitted by 
the former AUSA to Department of Justice personnel.  The Magistrate Judge further concluded 
that the additional requested discovery “is not relevant to the claims and defenses at issue in this 

litigation, and the defendant has sufficient facts to conduct a cross-examination on the issue of 
bias to the extent it is relevant.”  (Id. at 1).  The Magistrate Judge further ordered that the 
deposition testimony concerning the former government employee’s conduct in downloading and 
removing documents should remain under seal pending further order of the court.  This appeal 
followed.                                                                 
 Under Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(a), a District Judge may modify or set aside a decision of a 
Magistrate Judge on a non-dispositive matter only if it “is clearly erroneous or is contrary to 
law.”  Pure questions of law are reviewed de novo.  PowerShare, Inc. v. Syntel, Inc., 597 F.3d 10, 
15 (1st Cir. 2010).  Factual findings are clearly erroneous when “the reviewing court on the 
entire evidence is left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been 

committed.”  In re IDC Clambakes, Inc., 727 F.3d 58, 63-64 (1st Cir. 2013).  Mixed questions of 
fact and law are reviewed according to a sliding scale, under which “[t]he more fact intensive the 
question, the more deferential the level of review (though never more deferential than the ‘clear 
error’ standard); the more law intensive the question, the less deferential the level of review.”  Id. 
at 64.                                                                    
 The principal questions on this appeal are (1) whether further discovery is appropriate 
and (2) whether the present sealing order should be maintained.           
 1.  Whether Further Discovery Is Appropriate                         
 Under Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(b)(1), as a general matter “[p]arties may obtain discovery 
regarding any nonprivileged matter that is relevant to any party’s claim or defense and 
proportional to the needs of the case, considering the importance of the issues at stake in the 

action, the amount in controversy, the parties’ relative access to relevant information, the parties’ 
resources, the importance of the discovery in resolving the issues, and whether the burden or 
expense of the proposed discovery outweighs its likely benefit.”  Information “need not be 
admissible in evidence to be discoverable.”  Id.                          
 Regeneron contends, in substance, that the information at issue is relevant because (1) it 
tends to show that the government’s investigation is tainted by bias; (2) it tends to show that the  
witness, a former AUSA, is himself biased and lacks credibility; (3) it tends to show that the 
information at issue was mishandled in violation of the protective order issued by the court or 
otherwise sanctionable; and (4) further discovery is necessary in order to protect Regeneron’s 
rights in the information.                                                

 The first issue may be disposed of summarily.  Absent certain relatively narrow 
limitations, such as the constitutional prohibition against selective or discriminatory 
enforcement, there is no generalized right of targets of government investigations to have those 
investigations be untainted by “bias.”  The government may generally select its targets, and 
allocate its resources to investigations, as it sees fit, provided it is not doing so on the basis of 
race, gender, or other impermissible considerations.  There is no credible basis in the present 
record to conclude that the motivation of the government in conducting its investigation, and 
bringing this lawsuit, was in any respect improper.  Furthermore, and in any event, nothing about 
the information in dispute here would tend to prove the opposite—that is, that a generalized 
“bias” against Regeneron somehow tainted this investigation.  Nor is there any evidence that any 
alleged misbehavior unfairly undermined Regeneron’s ability to defend itself or otherwise 
prejudiced it in any meaningful way.                                      
 The second issue is whether the information tends to show that the witness is biased.  As 

to that issue, Regeneron has not made a showing that additional discovery is appropriate.  To 
begin, the former AUSA may not testify at the trial—for example, because he is not called to 
testify or because the Court excludes his testimony—in which case the issue is moot.  Even 
assuming, however, that he does, it appears that the only relevant information he may have to 
offer is his memory of the January 25, 2018 meeting between counsel for the government and 
counsel for Regeneron, at which corporate counsel is alleged to have made certain admissions.2   
 The credibility of the former AUSA, like that of any other witness, is of course fair game 
on cross-examination.  And matters that may be relevant to credibility are generally 
discoverable.  It is by no means clear that anything he may have done—which consists of the 
unauthorized downloading of government documents approximately three years after the 2018 

meeting occurred—bears in any way on his credibility, and it is therefore doubtful whether it is 
admissible.  See Fed. R. Evid. 608.  In any event, the Court need not decide at this stage whether 
the information is admissible at trial; the issue is whether further discovery is warranted. 
 As set forth above, Rule 26 does not permit unlimited discovery on any topic, regardless 
of its importance.  Among other things, the court must consider “the importance of the discovery 
in resolving the issues” and “whether the burden or expense of the proposed discovery outweighs 
its likely benefit.”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(b)(1).  Here, the issue is a relatively minor one at best:  the 


 2 The alleged underlying false claims appear to have occurred during the period from 2011 to 2015, and the 
former AUSA is not, of course, a percipient witness to those events.      
credibility of a witness to a meeting between counsel, long after the relevant events occurred.  
The information is of doubtful value in assessing that credibility.  And Regeneron has not been 
prevented from obtaining discovery as to that issue; it is simply contending that it wants to 
explore the issue in even greater depth.  The Magistrate Judge concluded that “the defendant has 

sufficient facts to conduct a cross-examination on the issue of bias to the extent it is relevant.”  
(Docket No. 186 at 1).  This Court agrees.  To the extent Regeneron seeks additional discovery, 
(1) it is of little apparent importance in resolving the issues and (2) the burden and expense of the 
proposed discovery greatly outweighs its likely benefit, which is meager at best. 
 The third issue is whether further discovery is warranted in order to permit the 
development of a factual record for sanctions.  Regeneron’s claim that the downloading violated 
the protective order issued in this case is without foundation, for the simple reason that the 
protective order had not yet been issued at the time.  To the extent Regeneron is seeking further 
information in order to seek discovery sanctions under Fed. R. Civ. P. 37, 28 U.S.C. § 1927, or 
otherwise, the Court at this stage sees no need for additional discovery to develop the record.  

Regeneron has not, in any event, moved for such sanctions, and it is not immediately obvious 
why they ought to be imposed.                                             
 Finally, the fourth issue is whether discovery is necessary to permit Regeneron to protect 
whatever proprietary or other rights it may have in the downloaded information.  As noted, the 
former AUSA has provided an affidavit stating that any documents that he improperly 
downloaded have been deleted and not disseminated any further.  There is no evidence in the 
record to suggest otherwise.  And there is no evidence that Regeneron has suffered any actual 
prejudice to date, or is reasonably likely to suffer any prejudice in the future.  It has now been 
more than two years since the information was downloaded and then deleted, and there has been 
no indication of any leak or other disclosure.                            
 Under the circumstances, the Court can see little benefit in permitting additional 
discovery, and without question the burden and expense of continued discovery greatly outweigh 

any likely benefit to be gained thereby.  To that extent, therefore, the decision of the Magistrate 
Judge is neither clearly erroneous nor contrary to law.                   
 2.  Whether the Matter Should Be Unsealed                            
 The order of the Magistrate Judge indicated that the relevant portion of the deposition 
transcript should remain under seal pending further order of the court.  The order itself did not 
state the basis for sealing the document.  The government, however, contends that it should 
remain sealed, principally because the sole purpose of the discovery is harassment and because 
the former AUSA has a protected privacy interest in his own personnel records pursuant to the 
Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552a(b).                                          
 As a general matter, records of court proceedings are presumed open to public scrutiny, 

and public access may be denied only for compelling reasons after specific judicial findings.  See 
M2 Consulting, Inc. v. MRO Software, Inc., 2005 WL 6726727, at *2 (D. Mass. Sept. 8, 2005) 
(“Rule 26(c)’s good cause requirement means that, [a]s a general proposition, pretrial discovery 
must take place in the public unless compelling reasons exist for denying the public access to the 
proceedings.” (quoting Public Citizen v. Liggett Grp., Inc., 858 F.2d 775, 789 (1st Cir. 1988))); 
Anderson v. Cryovac, Inc., 805 F.2d 1, 7 (1st Cir. 1986) (“A finding of good cause must be based 
on a particular factual demonstration of potential harm . . . .”).  Furthermore, the public has a 
particularly strong interest in matters involving alleged misconduct of public officials and 
employees, even those that are relatively minor.  See New England Apple Council v. Donovan, 
725 F.2d 139, 144 (1st Cir. 1984) (“The public has a significant, enduring interest in remaining 
informed about actions taken by public officials in the course of their duties.”). 
 Here, the transcript of a deposition, taken approximately one year after the AUSA left the 
office, does not appear to qualify as a personnel “record” of that individual within the meaning 

of the Privacy Act.  Moreover, there is no obviously compelling reason why the relevant portion 
of the transcript of the deposition should remain under seal.             
 The government contends that there is no basis for unsealing the deposition, other than as 
an act of retaliation against the former AUSA, and for purposes of needlessly harassing and 
embarrassing him.  It is certainly true that Regeneron has no particularized need to have the 
transcript unsealed; its counsel obviously have access to the deposition transcript—one of its 
lawyers was the questioning attorney—and can use it, if appropriate, in the defense of this case.  
Unsealing the transcript (except to the extent required for impeachment, if any, on cross-
examination) is therefore unnecessary to avoid prejudice to Regeneron.    
 Nonetheless, sealing is very much the exception, not the norm, and the sealing of matters 

involving misconduct by government employees should occur only under the most compelling 
circumstances.  For the most part, such circumstances are not present here, and the Magistrate 
Judge did not identify any in her order.  To that extent, therefore, the order of the Magistrate 
Judge was clearly erroneous.                                              
 There remains, however, a genuine concern that the transcript will be used for purposes 
of retaliation and harassment rather than for any legitimate reason.  In order to minimize that 
possibility, the Court will order that the transcript be unsealed—provided, however, that the 
name of the former AUSA, as well as any personal identifying information, should be redacted 
prior to its placement on the public docket.  There is no compelling reason, at least at this stage, 
why he should be identified publicly by name, particularly since he no longer holds a position of 
public trust, and there is a countervailing interest in protecting the witness from retaliation or 
harassment.                                                               
 3.  Conclusion                                                       

 For the foregoing reasons, the objections of defendant Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 
to the Magistrate Judge’s Order on the motion of the United States for a protective order, dated 
August 1, 2022, are GRANTED in part and DENIED in part, as follows:       
 (1) as to whether the additional discovery sought by defendant should be permitted, the 
order of the Magistrate Judge is neither clearly erroneous nor contrary to law, and therefore is 
affirmed; and                                                             
 (2) as to whether the relevant portion of the deposition transcript at issue should remain 
sealed, the order is in part clearly erroneous, and is therefore reversed in part.  The name of the 
former AUSA and any personal identifying information shall be redacted prior to the placement 
of the transcript on the public docket.                                   

So Ordered.                                                               

                            /s/ F. Dennis Saylor IV                   
                            F. Dennis Saylor IV                       
Dated:  April 21, 2023                                          Chief Judge, United States District Court

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
              DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                              

_______________________________________                                   
                           )                                         
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,       )                                         
                           )                                         
     Plaintiff,            )       Civil Action No.                  
                           )       20-11217-FDS                      
v.                         )                                         
                           )                                         
REGENERON PHARMACEUTICALS,      )                                         
INC.,                           )                                         
                           )                                         
     Defendant.            )                                         
_______________________________________)                                  


ORDER ON DEFENDANT’S OBJECTIONS TO THE MAGISTRATE JUDGE’S ORDER           
     ON THE MOTION OF THE UNITED STATES TO COMPEL                    
          PRODUCTION AND REOPEN DEPOSITION                           

SAYLOR, C.J.                                                              

After a hearing, and upon review of the memoranda filed by the parties and the 
attachments thereto, the objections of defendant Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., to the 
Magistrate Judge’s decision and order on the motion of the United States to compel production 
and reopen deposition (Docket No. 227, filed under seal) are DENIED, and the order of the 
Magistrate Judge is hereby affirmed.                                      
On December 6, 2022, Magistrate Judge Dein issued a memorandum of decision and 
order on the government’s motion to compel production of certain materials concerning a 
witness interview that Regeneron contended were protected by the attorney-client privilege and 
the work-product doctrine.  (Docket No. 212, filed under seal).  In substance, Magistrate Judge 
Dein concluded that Regeneron had waived the attorney-client privilege with respect to those 
materials; that work-product protection over those materials had been waived to the extent that 
they concerned the factual details of the witness interview; and that the opinions, observations, 
and analyses of that interview by Regeneron’s counsel, or other information revealing counsel’s 
mental impressions, remained protected by the work-product doctrine.  Magistrate Judge Dein 
also denied the motion to the extent that the government sought to reopen the deposition of the 
witness, although that denial was without prejudice to its renewal if appropriate after the 

government has had an opportunity to review the disclosed portions of the withheld materials. 
Under Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(a), a District Judge may modify or set aside a decision of a 
Magistrate Judge on a non-dispositive matter only if it “is clearly erroneous or is contrary to 
law.”  Pure questions of law are reviewed de novo.  PowerShare, Inc. v. Syntel, Inc., 597 F.3d 10, 
15 (1st Cir. 2010).  Factual findings are clearly erroneous when “the reviewing court on the 
entire evidence is left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been 
committed.”  In re IDC Clambakes, Inc., 727 F.3d 58, 63-64 (1st Cir. 2013).  Mixed questions of 
fact and law are reviewed according to a sliding scale, under which “[t]he more fact intensive the 
question, the more deferential the level of review (though never more deferential than the ‘clear 
error’ standard); the more law intensive the question, the less deferential the level of review.”  Id. 

at 64.                                                                    
Here, the decision of the Magistrate Judge is a thoughtful and careful resolution of the 
issues, set forth according to a clear analysis of the relevant legal framework.  It does not appear 
to this Court to be erroneous in any respect, much less clearly erroneous or contrary to 
law.  Accordingly, and because the Court agrees with her decision in all substantial respects, her 
order is affirmed without need for more substantial explanation.          
So Ordered.                                                               

                           /s/ F. Dennis Saylor IV                   
                           F. Dennis Saylor IV                       
Dated:  April 21, 2023                                          Chief Judge, United States District Court

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            
               DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS                              

_______________________________________                                   
                            )                                         
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,       )                                         
                            )                                         
      Plaintiff,            )       Civil Action No.                  
                            )       20-11217-FDS                      
 v.                         )                                         
                            )                                         
REGENERON PHARMACEUTICALS,      )                                         
INC.,                           )                                         
                            )                                         
      Defendant.            )                                         
_______________________________________)                                  


MEMORANDUM AND ORDER ON DEFENDANT’S MOTION TO DISMISS                 
SAYLOR, C.J.                                                              
 This is a case alleging violations of the Anti-Kickback Statute, 42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b, and 
False Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. §§ 3729 et seq., by a pharmaceutical company.  The United States 
has brought suit against Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., the manufacturer of a drug named 
Eylea, alleging that Regeneron improperly funneled millions of dollars to a purportedly 
independent foundation to subsidize patients’ copays for Eylea, inducing physicians to increase 
prescriptions of the drug at the expense of the Medicare Part B program and subverting the 
program’s copay requirement.  The complaint alleges that Regeneron’s actions violated the Anti-
Kickback Statute and caused the submission of false claims for payment to Medicare. 
 Regeneron has moved to dismiss the complaint for failure to state a claim upon which 
relief can be granted pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6), for failure to allege fraud with 
particularity as required by Fed. R. Civ. P. 9(b), and based on constitutional challenges under the 
First and Fifth Amendments.  For the following reasons, the motion will be denied. 
I.   Factual and Procedural Background                                    
 Unless otherwise noted, the following facts are as alleged in the complaint. 
 A.   The Parties and the Medicare Copay Assistance Program           
 Regeneron Pharmaceuticals is a pharmaceutical company founded in 1988.  (Compl. ¶ 

28).  It manufactures Eylea, a drug to treat neovascular (wet) age-related macular degeneration 
(“AMD”), an eye disease that primarily affects elderly people.  (Id. ¶ 29).  Eylea is administered 
by injection into the eye at a physician’s office.  (Id.).  It costs approximately $1,850 per dose.  
(Id.).  The recommended dose is one injection per eye, once a month for the first 12 months, and 
6-7 injections per year thereafter.  (Id.).  Eylea is presently the best-selling drug in the United 
States for AMD.  (Id. ¶ 31).                                              
 Eylea has two primary competitors, Avastin and Lucentis, both made by Genentech.  (Id. 
¶ 30).  All three drugs have comparable efficacy.  (Id.).  Lucentis costs $2,000 per dose.  Avastin 
costs $55 per dose, but it is only FDA-approved to treat certain types of cancer.  Some 
physicians nonetheless use it “off-label” to treat AMD.  (Id.).           

 Medicare is a federally funded insurance program for people aged 65 or older and for 
people with certain disabilities or afflictions.  (Id. ¶ 11).  Medicare Part B covers outpatient 
medical services and physician-administered drugs, like Eylea.  (Id. ¶ 13).  Once a beneficiary 
meets his or her annual deductible (currently $198), Medicare Part B pays 80% of the cost of 
covered prescription drugs, while the beneficiary is responsible for the remaining 20% copay.  
(Id. ¶ 14).  Some Medicare beneficiaries purchase supplemental insurance, called Medigap, to 
cover the copays.  (Id.).                                                 
 The purpose of requiring Medicare beneficiaries to pay copays is to give them an 
incentive to choose the most cost-effective treatment.  (Id. ¶ 15).  When a physician administers 
a drug covered by Medicare Part B, he or she submits claim to Medicare for the drug, and then 
receives a reimbursement from Medicare of 106% of the average sales price of the drug less the 
20% copay.  (Id. ¶ 16).  The physician is then responsible for collecting the copay from the 
patient.  (Id.).1                                                         

 The Chronic Disease Fund (“CDF”), now operating as Good Days, is a non-profit 
foundation that solicits donations from, among others, pharmaceutical companies, and uses that 
money to cover Medicare copays for prescription drugs.  (Id. ¶ 32).  Since 2010, CDF has 
operated an “AMD fund” that covers Medicare copays for patients prescribed AMD drugs.  (Id.).  
Before the FDA approved Eylea in 2011, Genentech, the maker of Lucentis, alone financed the 
AMD fund.  (Id. ¶ 33).  Following FDA approval for Eylea in 2011, Regeneron also began to 
finance the AMD fund, which began to cover copays for Eylea and Lucentis, but not Avastin.  
(Id.).  If a physician administers Eylea to a Medicare patient who indicates that they will have 
trouble affording the copay, the physician may submit a claim to CDF for the applicable 
Medicare copay, and CDF will pay that amount directly to the physician.  (Id. ¶ 35).  Thus, if 

CDF approves a copay grant for an Eylea patient, the physician does not need to collect the 
copay from the patient and does not bear the financial risk if the patient cannot afford to pay it.  
(Id.).                                                                    
 In 2013 and 2014, Regeneron contributed tens of millions of dollars to the AMD fund.  
(Id. ¶¶ 1, 4).  The complaint alleges that Regeneron did so in order to induce physicians to 
prescribe and submit claims for Eylea, which Medicare then reimbursed.  (Id. ¶¶ 3-4).  The 
complaint further alleges that Regeneron continuously communicated with CDF to ensure that it 


 1 Eylea is a “buy and bill” drug, which means that physicians buy the drug in bulk and store it in their 
offices before prescribing and administering it to patients, filing a claim with Medicare (and, if applicable, a claim 
with a charity for copay assistance for the patient), and receiving reimbursements.  (Def. Mem. at 5). 
was donating enough to cover the Medicare copays of Eylea patients only.  (Id.).  According to 
the complaint, Regeneron employed a business model under which any increase in the list price 
of Eylea could benefit Regeneron, at taxpayer expense, if it funneled matching donations to a 
foundation to cover copays:  for every $100 increase in the price of the drug, Regeneron could 

contribute $20 to a copay assistance foundation to eliminate the financial burden on patients of 
the 20% copay, while receiving $80 in Medicare reimbursements.            
 The complaint alleges that the promise, or implicit guarantee, of copay assistance from 
CDF significantly altered the decision-making of patients and physicians.  Because CDF covers 
copays for Eylea and Lucentis, which cost $1,850 and $2,000 per dose respectively, but not 
Avastin, which costs $55 per dose, Eylea and Lucentis are actually cheaper out-of-pocket than 
Avastin for Medicare patients.  (Id. ¶ 30).   According to the complaint, when physicians knew 
that copay assistance was not available for Eylea or Lucentis, they often prescribed the cheaper 
Avastin, in order to avoid the risk of burdening their patients with expensive copays or being 
unable to collect the copays.  (Id.).                                     

 Regeneron contends that its donations were charitable in nature and not made to 
improperly induce patients or physicians to purchase Eylea.  (Def. Mem. at 19).  It asserts that 
the AMD fund was structured in such a way as to make it impossible for its donations to 
influence physicians’ prescribing behavior.  (Id. at 12).  CDF allocated its AMD grants to 
patients on a first-come, first-served basis.  (Id.).  Therefore, according to Regeneron, physicians 
had no way of knowing whether a patient would eventually receive copay assistance from CDF 
when they made their prescribing decisions.  (Id.).                       
 B.   Regeneron’s Allegedly Improper Behavior                         
 The complaint describes several events from 2011 to 2014 that allegedly demonstrate that 
Regeneron donated certain amounts to CDF in order to improperly influence, induce, and 
increase prescriptions and claims for Eylea in violation of the Anti-Kickback Statute, causing 
false claims to be submitted to Medicare.                                 
      1.   The Xcenda Report                                          

 Prior to the commercial launch of Eylea in 2011, Regeneron commissioned a report from 
Xcenda, an outside consultant, to analyze the proposed pricing and reimbursement structures for 
the drug.  (Compl. ¶ 36).  Xcenda concluded, based on projected sales and the estimated 
proportion of patients who would need Medicare copay assistance, that Regeneron should donate 
approximately $3 million to copay assistance foundations in 2012 to offset the cost of Eylea 
copays.  (Id.).                                                           
 At that time, Regeneron was considering a price of $1,500 per injection.  (Id. ¶ 37).  
Xcenda’s report found that increasing the price to $1,950 would benefit Regeneron financially, 
because the 43% increase in donations to copay assistance foundations that Regeneron would 
need to make would be offset by revenue increases from Medicare reimbursements.  (Id.).  
Ultimately, Regeneron set the price of Eylea at $1,850.  (Id. ¶ 38).2     

 The Xcenda report also recommended that Regeneron refer Medicare patients who could 
not afford Eylea to a copay foundation, rather than providing them with free Eylea.  (Id.).  The 
reasoning was that although those two options would both eliminate out-of-pocket expenses for 
patients, offering free Eylea would generate no revenue for Regeneron, while offering copay 
assistance would generate revenue from the resulting Medicare claims.  (Id.).  To date, 
Regeneron offers free Eylea to patients who cannot afford it only if they do not have insurance 


 2 According to Regeneron, it has not changed the price of Eylea from $1,850 per dose since its launch.  
(Def. Mem. at 5).                                                         
coverage for Eylea, while barring Medicare patients from its free-drug program. (Id.). 
      2.   Regeneron’s Donations to and Communications with CDF3      
 The FDA approved Eylea for treatment of wet AMD on November 28, 2011.  (Id. ¶ 41).  
Regeneron gave CDF $125,000 in 2011 and $600,000 in 2012.  (Id.).  Cynthia Sherman, the 

former senior director for reimbursement at Regeneron, testified that the company did “not 
provide a lot of money the first year because you just didn’t know how many—what the uptake 
of Eylea would be, and Regeneron did not want to pay for Lucentis’s copay.”  (Id.).  Eylea sales 
in 2012 greatly exceeded expectations, causing Regeneron to consider increasing their donations 
to CDF.  (Id. ¶ 42).                                                      
 On July 9, 2012, Robert Krukowski, a senior manager for reimbursement at Regeneron, 
asked his direct report, William Daniels, if Daniels had spoken to Clorinda Walley, CDF’s 
executive director, about increasing Regeneron’s contribution to CDF and by what amount.  (Id. 
¶ 44).  On July 23, Daniels emailed Walley requesting a meeting, stating that he would “need to 
justify [his] request for [Regeneron’s] 2013 donation.”  (Id.).  On July 24, Walley provided 

Daniels with a spreadsheet entitled “Regeneron Projections 2013,” which projected the number 
of Eylea patients assisted by the AMD fund and the amount of copay assistance they would need 
over 2013, concluding that CDF needed $40 million in contributions from Regeneron to cover 
the cost of Eylea copays.  (Id. ¶ 45).                                    


 3 A substantial portion of the government’s allegations concern alleged internal communications among 
Regeneron and CDF staff.  The list of relevant people includes the following:  Clorinda Walley, the executive 
director of CDF; Robert Krukowski, a Senior Manager for Reimbursement at Regeneron; William Daniels, 
Krukowski’s direct report and Walley’s point of contact at Regeneron; Cynthia Sherman, the former Senior Director 
for Reimbursement at Regeneron; Bob Terifay, Regeneron’s Vice President, Commercial; Stephen Dressel, a 
Regeneron financial analyst; Robert Davis, Regeron’s Executive Director and Head of Trade, who reported directly 
to Terifay; Cathy Casey, Regeneron’s Senior Director for Reimbursement Strategy; Christopher Fenimore, 
Regeneron’s Vice President of Financial Planning; John Calabro, Regeneron’s Vice President of Internal Audit; and 
Thibaux Corbin de Mangoux, Regeneron’s Manager of Internal Audit and Calabro’s direct report. 
 Daniels, believing it unlikely that Regeneron senior management would approve a $40 
million donation to CDF, performed his own analysis to estimate the amount that CDF would 
need to cover Eylea patients’ Medicare copays in 2013.  (Id. ¶ 46).  He concluded that CDF 
would need about $5.6 million to cover “rollover patients” (that is, renewals of copay-assistance 

grants that CDF gave Eylea patients in 2012) and $11.5 to $19 million to cover new patients.  
(Id.).  In anticipation of an October 8, 2012 meeting of senior management to discuss Regeneron 
contributions to CDF, Daniels sent several emails, slides, and documents comparing his and 
Walley’s projections.  (Id. ¶¶ 47-51).  One such document projected “millions of dollars of 
potential lost sales” if Regeneron did not donate enough to CDF to cover the Medicare copays of 
potential new Eylea patients.  (Id. ¶ 48).  Another warned, “CDF management has communicated 
that for 2013, if every donor doesn’t cover their market share the fund will be closed.”  (Id. ¶ 50).  
A slide that Daniels circulated on August 27 reported that Regeneron’s share of the AMD fund 
was 6,200 patients, as quoted by CDF, and that Regeneron would face potential lost revenue of 
approximately $10.9 million if the fund were to shut down in 2013.  (Id.).  Notwithstanding those 

projections, at the meeting on October 8, 2012, the senior management team decided that 
Regeneron would pay CDF only $2.5 million in 2013, a number that Daniels subsequently 
conveyed to Walley.  (Id. ¶ 52).                                          
 On December 29, 2012, Walley e-mailed Daniels a warning that a contribution of $2.5 
million would not enable the AMD fund to stay open past early 2013.  (Id. ¶ 53).  Walley 
attached a revised projection showing that the AMD fund would need approximately $25 million 
to cover Medicare copays for Eylea patients in 2013.  (Id.).              
 On January 3, 2013, Daniels and Krukowski had another meeting with senior Regeneron 
officials to discuss donations to CDF.  (Id. ¶ 55).  After the meeting, Krukowski sent attendees 
an email reiterating that “the additional $2.5 million we were planning on funding in Q1 was not 
enough based up[on] the current number of EYLEA patients CDF has already rolled over and 
enrolled for 2013 . . . we need to up our funding in Q1 significantly and make Bob [Terifay, 
Regeneron’s Vice President, Commercial] aware that we potentially need ~$25mil to adequately 

fund our patient responsibility for 2013.”  (Id.).  On January 4, Christopher Fenimore, 
Regeneron’s Vice President of Financial Planning, requested that Stephen Dressel, a financial 
analyst, “walk us through with Bob [Terifay] the economics of how much we contributed last 
year vs. [Genentech], how much got paid out to Lucentis v. Eylea patients last year, and based on 
this info what we think we’ll need to do this year to keep the fund solvent.”  (Id. ¶ 56).  That 
same day, Fenimore reported that “Bob [Terifay] just walked me through the logic . . . we agree 
to put $25 million in the plan.”  (Id.).  The complaint alleges that this donation of $25 million 
exactly matched the amount that CDF requested to cover Eylea copays in 2013.  (Id.). 
 On February 13, 2013, Regeneron paid CDF $5 million, and on May 1, Regeneron paid 
CDF $7.5 million.  (Id. ¶ 58).  That donation of $12.5 million in the first half of 2013 was 

exactly half of the $25 million that CDF projected it would need to cover Eylea copays in 2013. 
 On June 18, 2013, Walley e-mailed Daniels an updated “Regeneron Projections 2013” 
spreadsheet, which showed that CDF would now need $35 million to cover Eylea copays in 
2013, given recent claim activity—an increase from the previous $25 million estimate.  (Id. ¶ 
59).  Daniels created an internal slide presentation to justify the increased request for $35 
million, which reported the following, based on Eylea-specific information provided by Walley:  
CDF had paid $32.6 million in claims through June 3, 2013; renewals for Eylea patients 
accounted for 41% of the AMD fund; and Regeneron could expect a return on investment (ROI) 
of 465%, or $198.5 million in potential Eylea sales, from paying CDF $35 million in 2013.  (Id.  
¶ 60).  On June 26, 2013, upon viewing these slides, senior managers at Regeneron announced 
that they agreed to pay CDF the full $35 million requested in 2013 to cover copays for Eylea 
patients.  (Id. ¶ 61).                                                    
 On August 21, 2013, Regeneron paid CDF $7.5 million; on September 25, Regeneron 

paid CDF $10 million; and on October 1, Regeneron paid CDF $5 million.  (Id. ¶ 63).  Those 
donations, coupled with the $12.5 million donated in the first half of 2013, totaled $35 million in 
2013, equal to the amount that CDF reported was necessary to cover Eylea copays.  (Id.). 
 On January 3, 2014, Walley sent Daniels an estimate that Regeneron would need to 
donate $25.5 million to cover CDF’s copay assistance to Eylea patients in the first quarter of 
2014.  (Id. ¶ 65).4  Daniels later testified that he understood this request was meant to cover costs 
for Eylea patients only.  (Id.).  On January 6, Daniels sent an email to senior management, 
including Bob Terifay, Regeneron’s Vice President, Commercial, and Stephen Dressel, the 
financial analyst, recommending that Regeneron donate $25.5 million to CDF in the first quarter 
of 2014, in two equal installments of $12.75 million each.  (Id. ¶ 66).  On January 10, Daniels 

and his manager Krukowski learned from a Regeneron sales representative that CDF was “out of 
funds” and as a result, a large retina clinic was “putting patients only on Avastin.”  (Id. ¶ 67).  On 
January 15, Regeneron paid CDF $12.75 million, as recommended by Daniels as half of what 
was requested by Walley.  (Id. ¶ 69).                                     
 In sum, from 2011 through 2014, Regeneron’s payments to CDF matched very closely to 
CDF’s spending on Eylea copay assistance, as demonstrated in the following chart: 



 4 This represented the sum of $29.5 million to renew grants for Eylea patients and $5.5 million for new 
grants, less $9.5 million credited to Regeneron for its 2013 donations to CDF that had not yet been paid out in 
grants.  (Id. ¶ 65).                                                      
           Regeneron Payments to CDF vs. CDF Expenditures on Eylea 
                                    Co-pays 
   $80,000,000 
   $60,000,000 
   $40,000,000 
   $20,000,000 
            S- 
                 >      SS  SF    FP  DY        AP  >  we 
                   :     :     :     yn)     SP    Pe    ee 
          nS  Ady  AO”  AD”  AO” AY’.                     20”  .o> 
           ¥           ¥           ¥         □         ¥         ¥         ¥ 
                    eee Accumulated CDF spend on Eylea 
                    =< Accumulated payments by Regeneron to CDF 

(Id.   90). 
  The complaint does not allege that the pattern of communication and matching donations 
between CDF and Regeneron continued past early 2014, but states that “the scrutiny of CDF and 
other co-pay foundations intensified” and caused the parties to become “more circumspect in 
their written communications and patterns with respect to funding requests and payments.”  □□□□ 4] 
70).  Nonetheless, based on the pattern established over 2011-2014, the complaint alleges that by 
2014, “Regeneron understood from CDF that CDF was using Regeneron’s money to ensure that 
physicians did not need to consider the impact of Medicare copays when deciding to purchase 
and prescribe Eylea.”  (/d.). 
        3.     Resulting False Claims to Medicare 
  The complaint alleges that Regeneron’s funding of CDF induced “thousands” of 
Medicare-reimbursed purchases of Eylea, resulting in “tens of millions of dollars” of Medicare 
claims.  (Id. [9] 97-98).  Since 2013, Medicare Part B has spent over $11.5 billion on Eylea 
reimbursements; in 2013 and 2014 alone, Medicare spent $1.9 billion for the drug.  (/d. 4 1). 

                                  10 

When CDF approved applications for Eylea subsidies, it would pay the 20% copay directly to 
prescribing physicians, and the physicians submitted associated claims to Medicare to cover the 
remaining 80% of the cost of the drug.  (Id. ¶ 99).  The complaint provides representative 
examples of eleven Massachusetts patients who received Eylea injections in 2013 and 2014, for 

whom CDF covered the $392.20 copays in full and Medicare paid the remaining $1,537.42 cost 
to the physician.  (Id. ¶ 101).5                                          
 C.   Regeneron’s Alleged Knowledge of Wrongdoing and the Internal Audit 
 The complaint alleges that Regeneron knew that it should not use CDF as a conduit for 
Eylea patient reimbursements and that it should not solicit Eylea-specific data from CDF in order 
to set its donation amounts.  Further, it alleges that Regeneron executives knew their actions 
were unlawful and attempted to hide evidence of their communications with CDF from internal 
auditors.                                                                 
 For example, in 2011, Cynthia Sherman, then the senior director for reimbursement at 
Regeneron, warned her superiors that it was illegal to seek out a “breakdown of [CDF] spend by 

Eylea users” and to get “actual utilization data” for the number of Eylea reimbursements from 
the CDF fund.  (Compl. ¶ 72).  Following the October 8, 2012 meeting where William Daniels 
reported that CDF had funded 6,200 Eylea patients, Robert Davis, Regeneron’s Executive 
Director and Head of Trade, warned Daniels and his supervisor Robert Krukowski that 
Regeneron should not be receiving or using Eylea-specific data from CDF.  (Id. ¶ 73).  On 
December 5, 2012, Daniels e-mailed Krukowski a copy of a Special Advisory Bulletin issued by 
the Office of the Inspector General to the Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS-


 5 For one of these patients, Medicare paid $1,511.81 and the copay amount was $385.66, but the parties do 
not explain why the list price of Eylea was slightly lower for this patient. 
OIG”) in November 2005, which cautioned pharmaceutical companies against “solicit[ing] or 
receiv[ing] data from [copay assistance] charit[ies] that would facilitate the manufacturer in 
correlating the amount or frequency of its donations with the number of subsidized prescriptions 
for its products” so as to not run afoul of the Anti-Kickback Statute.  See HHS-OIG, Special 

Advisory Bulletin on Patient Assistance Programs for Medicare Part D Enrollees, 70 Fed. Reg. 
70623 (Nov. 22, 2005).  (Id. ¶ 74).                                       
 In February 2013, Regeneron’s internal auditors John Calabro and Thibaux Corbin de 
Mangoux began an audit of the company’s financial assistance programs, including its 
relationship with CDF.  (Id. ¶ 76).  Corbin e-mailed Daniels, requesting “detail around the 
rationale for the amount paid [to CDF],” including any “analysis” of the amount and “feedback 
reports . . . on how money given by Regeneron is actually being spent.”  (Id. ¶ 77).  Daniels 
forwarded the request to Krukowski, Davis, and Terifay, commenting, “Please see below.  I am 
not really comfortable providing the documentation he is requesting.”  (Id.).  Terifay responded 
to the audit team:  “Pharmaceutical companies cannot provide reimbursement assistance of any 

kind to patients covered in any way by a government insurance program. . . [D]onors have no 
rights to information of any sort of disposition of funds . . . We cannot ask for any information 
from the CDF.  We gave a charitable donation.”  (Id. ¶ 79).  Terifay’s response also included an 
altered version of Daniel’s original comment, which now read:  “I am not really comfortable 
asking for [formerly ‘providing’] the documentation he is requesting.”  (Id. ¶ 80). 
 In November 2013, Regeneron reopened the internal audit.  Following a November 22, 
2013 meeting between the auditors, Davis, Krukowski, and Casey, Calabro sent the participants 
an email seeking to confirm that Daniels “ha[d] not had any conversations with CDF concerning 
product level data” and requesting “a copy . . . of the monthly report of aggregate data we 
receive from CDF.”  (Id. ¶ 84).  Regeneron, however, had only received one “monthly report of 
aggregate data” about the AMD fund, in February 2012; instead, it had mainly been receiving 
spreadsheets from CDF showing non-aggregate, Eylea-specific numbers and expenditures within 
the AMD fund.  (Id.).  Upon receiving that request from the auditors, Daniels asked Walley for 

the “monthly CDF activity report” and sent it to Calabro, without disclosing that he had only 
once before received such “aggregate monthly” data and typically received different, Eylea-
specific data from CDF instead.  (Id. ¶ 85).                              
 Calabro followed up by asking Daniels:  “Do you receive any other reports or data in 
emails from CDF? If so, please provide.  How does CDF make a request for additional funding? 
Is it verbal or by email?  How do they justify it?  Please provide any documentation you might 
have regarding such requests.”  (Id. ¶ 86).  Daniels forwarded the e-mail to Terifay, asking, 
“How should [we] answer second question from [Calabro]?”  (Id.).  Terifay responded, “Isn’t the 
answer that she estimates what she needs for the year verbally and then we divide across the year 
when we can afford it,” an answer that the complaint alleges Terifay knew was false.  (Id.).  

Accordingly, Daniels responded to Calabro:  “No, I don’t receive any other reports or data.  My 
contact estimates what she needs for the year verbally and then we divide across the year when 
we can afford it.  If she is running low, she calls and indicates what more she needs.”  (Id. ¶ 87).  
Daniels later testified that his statement, “I don’t receive any other reports or data,” was false, 
and that he said it because he was told to; he also testified that the remainder of his e-mail was a 
summary of Terifay’s answer, which Daniels considered to be incomplete.  (Id.). 
 Calabro followed up again in an email to Daniels, Davis, Krukowski, and Casey, asking, 
“When [Walley] makes a request for funding, how does she justify it?  Can you send me an 
example email?”  (Id. ¶ 88).  Davis responded, “It is all verbal.”  (Id. ¶ 88).  Again, this was a 
false statement, according to the allegations of the complaint, which states that Walley requested 
funding using e-mails and spreadsheets showing the exact amounts requested to compensate 
Eylea patients.                                                           
 D.   Procedural Background                                           

 The United States filed a complaint on June 24, 2020, alleging presentation of false 
claims in violation of the False Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(A) (2009) (Count 1); making 
or using false records material to a false or fraudulent claim in violation of the False Claims Act, 
31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(B) (2009) (Count 2); and unjust enrichment (Count 3).  Essentially, the 
complaint alleges that Regeneron’s efforts to funnel money into CDF specifically to reimburse 
the copays of Eylea patients violated the Anti-Kickback Statute, 42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(b).  The 
resulting claims to Medicare were tainted by illegal kickbacks in violation of the False Claims 
Act.                                                                      
 Regeneron has moved to dismiss the complaint on the grounds that (1) the complaint fails 
to state a claim for violation of the Anti-Kickback Statute; (2) the complaint fails to state a claim 

that Regeneron’s donations caused the submission of false claims; (3) the complaint fails to 
plead the violations of the Anti-Kickback Statute and False Claims Act with the sufficient 
particularity necessary to satisfy Fed. R. Civ. P. 9(b); and (4) the government’s prosecution 
violates the First Amendment and the due-process rights guaranteed by the Fifth Amendment. 
II.  Legal Standard                                                       
 On a motion to dismiss, the Court “must assume the truth of all well-plead[ed] facts and 
give . . . plaintiff the benefit of all reasonable inferences therefrom.”  Ruiz v. Bally Total Fitness 
Holding Corp., 496 F.3d 1, 5 (1st Cir. 2007) (citing Rogan v. Menino, 175 F.3d 75, 77 (1st Cir. 
1999)).  To survive a motion to dismiss, the complaint must state a claim that is plausible on its 
face.  Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007).  That is, “[f]actual allegations must 
be enough to raise a right to relief above the speculative level . . . on the assumption that all the 
allegations in the complaint are true (even if doubtful in fact).”  Id. at 555 (citations omitted).  
“The plausibility standard is not akin to a ‘probability requirement,’ but it asks for more than a 

sheer possibility that a defendant has acted unlawfully.”  Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678 
(2009) (quoting Twombly, 550 U.S. at 556).  Dismissal is appropriate if the complaint fails to set 
forth “factual allegations, either direct or inferential, respecting each material element necessary 
to sustain recovery under some actionable legal theory.”  Gagliardi v. Sullivan, 513 F.3d 301, 
305 (1st Cir. 2008) (quoting Centro Medico del Turabo, Inc. v. Feliciano de Melecio, 406 F.3d 1, 
6 (1st Cir. 2005)).                                                       
 Under Rule 9(b), the standard for allegations of fraud is higher than the normal pleading 
standard. To survive a motion to dismiss, a complaint alleging fraud must “state with 
particularity the circumstances constituting fraud.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 9(b). 
III.  Analysis                                                            

 A.   Regulatory Framework                                            
 The False Claims Act (“FCA”), 31 U.S.C. §§ 3729-33, imposes civil liability for anyone 
who “knowingly presents, or causes to be presented, a false or fraudulent claim for payment or 
approval” or “knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made or used, a false record or statement 
material to a false or fraudulent claim.”  31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(A), (a)(1)(B).  A “claim” is “any 
request or demand . . . for money or property” presented to an officer, employee, or agent of the 
United States.  31 U.S.C. § 3729(b)(2).                                   
 The Anti-Kickback Statute (“AKS”), 42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b, states that “whoever 
knowingly and willfully offers or pays any remuneration (including any kickback, bribe, or 
rebate) directly or indirectly, overtly or covertly, in cash or in kind to any person to induce such 
person . . . to purchase . . . or recommend purchasing . . . any good, facility, service, or item for 
which payment may be made in whole or in part under a Federal health care program” shall be 
guilty of a felony.  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(b)(2).  In 2010, Congress amended the AKS to clarify 

that any Medicare claim “that includes items or services resulting from a violation of [the AKS] 
constitutes a false or fraudulent claim for the purposes of [the FCA].”  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(g); 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, Pub. L. 111-148, 124 Stat. 119 (2010).  In other 
words, “an AKS violation that results in a federal health care payment is a per se false claim 
under the FCA.”  Guilfoile v. Shields, 913 F.3d 178, 190 (1st Cir. 2019) (quoting U.S. ex rel. 
Lutz v. United States, 853 F.3d 131, 135 (4th Cir. 2017)).                
 B.   Whether the Complaint States a Violation of the Anti-Kickback Statute 
 Defendant contends that the complaint fails to state a violation of the AKS because its 
donations to CDF were not intended to—and could not—induce patients or physicians to 
purchase Eylea.                                                           

 The AKS makes it illegal to “offer[] or pay[] any remuneration . . . to induce [any] person 
. . . to purchase . . . or recommend purchasing . . . any . . . item for which payment may be made  
. . . under a Federal health care program.”  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(b)(2).  Liability under the AKS 
requires an “intent to induce a referral or recommendation,” and “[a]n intent to induce referrals   
. . . means an intent ‘to gain influence over the reason or judgment’ of the [prescribing] 
physicians.”  United States v. Medtronic, Inc., 189 F. Supp. 3d 259, 268, 271 (D. Mass. 2016) 
(quoting United States v. McClatchey, 217 F.3d 823, 834 (10th Cir. 2000)).  Put another way, 
“the heartland of what the AKS is intended to prevent [is] the use of payments to improperly 
influence decisions on the provision of health care that lead to claims for payment to federal 
health care programs,” like Medicare.  Guilfoile v. Shields, 913 F.3d 178, 192-93 (1st Cir. 2019) 
(finding allegations that healthcare conglomerate paid referral fees to a consultant to refer 
hospital contracts to the conglomerate and then billed Medicaid and Medicare for its services 
were sufficient to state a claim under the AKS).                          

 The intent of the entity providing remuneration is critical to proving an AKS violation.  A 
person or company who offers or pays remuneration to a healthcare provider violates the AKS 
“so long as one purpose of the offer or payment is to induce Medicare or Medicaid patient 
referrals.”  United States v. McClatchey, 217 F.3d 823, 835 (10th Cir. 2000) (emphasis added) 
(upholding criminal conviction based on this jury instruction and rejecting defendants’ argument 
that government must prove their primary purpose was to induce referrals).  However, a person 
or company “cannot be convicted merely because [he] hoped or expected or believed that 
referrals may ensue from remuneration that was designed wholly for other purposes.”  Id. at 834.  
A jury must make the “difficult factual determination” of a payor-company’s intent in paying or 
offering remuneration to a healthcare provider:  that is, is the prospect of inducing Medicare-

funded patient referrals the “motivating factor” for the remunerative relationship, or is it simply a 
“collateral hope or expectation”?  Id. at 834 n.7.  The former subjects the payor-company to 
liability under the AKS, while the latter does not.                       
 Under this legal framework, companies’ practices of waiving copays or making donations 
to offset the cost of copays may violate the AKS, as case law and guidance from the Office of the 
Inspector General for the Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS-OIG”), the agency 
that administers Medicare, have established.  Copay discounts or waivers made directly to 
patients certainly implicate the AKS.  The Seventh Circuit has found that a pharmacy’s practice 
of forgiving Medicare customers’ copays, and providing them small gifts (such as tins of caviar), 
in order to induce them to fill their prescriptions there rather than at competitor pharmacies, was 
a “kickback” under the AKS:                                               
 The fraudulent character of giving discounts or refunds to the pharmacy's 
 customers is less obvious—what is wrong with offering an inducement that 
 reduces a product's cost to the consumer?  The answer is that a discount or refund 
 can become a “kickback” . . . because it artificially inflates the price that the 
 government pays pharmacies for prescription drugs for Medicare or Medicaid 
 beneficiaries. . . The [discount or] refund to the customer would thus have been a 
 “kickback” . . . because it would have increased the pharmacy's sales (and 
 presumably its profits, as otherwise it wouldn't provide refunds) at the 
 government's expense.  It would have had done so either by diverting customers 
 from other pharmacies or by inducing customers to purchase drugs that they 
 would not have been willing to purchase had they been responsible for the copay. 

U.S. ex rel. Grenadyor v. Ukrainian Village Pharmacy, Inc., 772 F.3d 1102, 1104-05 (7th Cir. 
2014).  See also U.S. ex rel. Riedel v. Boston Heart Diagnostics Corp., 332 F. Supp. 3d 48 
(D.D.C. 2018) (allegation that pharmaceutical company waived patient copays to induce 
physicians to use its lab services sufficiently stated AKS and FCA violation); United States v. 
Berkeley Heartlab, 225 F. Supp. 3d 487 (D.S.C. 2016) (waiver of copays is “remuneration” for 
purposes of AKS); U.S. ex rel. Goodman v. Arriva Medical, LLC, 2020 WL 3840446 (M.D. 
Tenn. July 8, 2020) (waivers of Medicare copays can violate the AKS and FCA). 
 Similarly, improperly structured donations to copay-assistance charities may violate the 
AKS if they are made with the intent to induce Medicare-funded referrals or drug purchases.  
See, e.g., U.S. ex rel. Strunck v. Mallinckrodt Ard LLC, 2020 WL 362717 (E.D. Pa. Jan. 22, 
2020) (complaint stated AKS violation sufficient to survive motion to dismiss where 
pharmaceutical company allegedly donated to CDF fund designated solely to subsidize copays 
for one drug, produced by the company); U.S. ex rel. Vitale v. MiMedx Group, Inc., 381 F. Supp. 
3d 647 (D.S.C. 2019) (complaint stated AKS violation sufficient to survive motion to dismiss 
where defendant donated to copay-assistance charity to induce patients on Medicare to purchase 
defendant’s products).                                                    
 On November 22, 2005, HHS-OIG issued a “special advisory bulletin” addressing how 
companies may contribute to copay-assistance programs without violating the AKS and FCA.  
See HHS-OIG, Special Advisory Bulletin on Patient Assistance Programs for Medicare Part D 
Enrollees, 70 Fed. Reg. 70623 (Nov. 22, 2005).6  The 2005 bulletin advises, “[P]harmaceutical 

manufacturers can donate to bona fide independent charity PAPs [patient assistance programs], 
provided appropriate safeguards exist.”  Id. at 70625.  The bulletin contains an illustrative list of 
such safeguards, stating that a pharmaceutical company’s donations to an independent copay 
assistance charity “should raise few, if any, anti-kickback statute concerns,” as long as: 
 (i) Neither the pharmaceutical manufacturer nor any affiliate . . . exerts any direct 
 or indirect influence or control over the charity or the subsidy program; 

 (ii) The charity awards assistance in a truly independent manner that severs any 
 link between the pharmaceutical manufacturer’s funding and the beneficiary (i.e., 
 the assistance provided to the beneficiary cannot be attributed to the donating 
 pharmaceutical manufacturer);                                        

 (iii) The charity awards assistance without regard to the pharmaceutical 
 manufacturer’s interests and without regard to the beneficiary’s choice of product, 
 provider, practitioner, supplier, or Part D drug plan;               

 (iv) The charity provides assistance based upon a reasonable, verifiable, and 
 uniform measure of financial need that is applied in a consistent manner; and 

 (v) The pharmaceutical manufacturer does not solicit or receive data from the 
 charity that would facilitate the manufacturer in correlating the amount or 
 frequency of its donations with the number of subsidized prescriptions for its 
 products.                                                            

Id.  at 70626.  It adds in a footnote to section (v):                     

 6 The bulletin is directed to enrollees of Medicare Part D, which imposes cost-sharing (copay) obligations 
upon patients receiving prescription drugs, not specifically enrollees of Medicare Part B, which imposes copays for 
prescription drugs administered in an outpatient setting.  However, the guidance (how to contribute to copay 
assistance foundations without violating the AKS and FCA) is applicable to both Parts B and D. 
 We have previously approved a bona fide independent charity PAP arrangement 
 that included only limited reporting of aggregate data to donors in the form of 
 monthly or less frequent reports containing aggregate data about the number of 
 all applicants for assistance in a disease category and the number of patients 
 qualifying for assistance in that disease category . . . Reporting of data that is not 
 in the aggregate or that is patient specific would be problematic, as would 
 reporting of any data, whether or not in the aggregate, related to the identity, 
 amount, or nature of subsidized drugs.                               

Id. at 70626 n.16.  The bulletin summarizes these safeguards by stating the operative rule or 
criteria for evaluating the legality of donations to PAP’s as follows:  “Simply put, the 
independent charity PAP must not function as a conduit for payments by the pharmaceutical 
manufacturer to patients and must not impermissibly influence beneficiaries’ drug choice.”  Id. at 
70627.                                                                    
 Here, the facts alleged in the complaint and the reasonable inferences from the facts are 
sufficient to state a plausible claim of an AKS violation.                
      1.   Remuneration                                               
 First, defendant indirectly provided remuneration to patients prescribed Eylea, by making 
donations to CDF that offset patients’ copays.  Arguably, the promise of copay waivers through 
CDF also provided remuneration to the physicians prescribing Eylea, where remuneration means 
“anything of value,” by saving physicians’ time that might be spent on explaining copays and 
assessing patients’ financial hardship, removing the financial risk to physicians if they prescribed 
a drug that patients could not pay them back for, appeasing staff and patients, and generating 
increased business due to satisfied patients.7  In several recent cases, district courts have found 

 7 This definition of “remuneration” derives from a 1994 HHS-OIG bulletin:  “In certain cases, a provider, 
practitioner or supplier who routinely waives Medicare copayments or deductibles also could be held liable under 
the Medicare and Medicaid anti-kickback statute.  42 U.S.C.  1320a-7b(b).  The statute makes it illegal to offer, pay, 
solicit or receive anything of value as an inducement to generate business payable by Medicare or Medicaid.  When 
providers, practitioners or suppliers forgive financial obligations for reasons other than genuine financial hardship of 
the particular patient, they may be unlawfully inducing that patient to purchase items or services from them.”  HHS-
OIG, Publication of OIG Special Fraud Alerts, 59 Fed. Reg. 65372 (Dec. 19, 1994) (emphasis added).  
that alleged agreements to reduce or waive lab-testing copays for patients could constitute 
remuneration to the physicians referring test to those labs, sufficient to state a claim under the 
AKS.  See U.S. ex rel. STF, LLC v. Vibrant America, LLC, 2020 WL 4818706, at *13 (N.D. Cal. 
Aug. 19, 2020) (“[A] benefit conferred directly on third parties, such as patients in the case of fee 

waivers . . . can also indirectly confer a benefit on physicians sufficient to support a claim under 
the Anti-Kickback Statute . . . [because] physicians are able to pay their staff less, appease their 
staff, and in some instances, obtain a portion of the medical staff’s kickbacks.”); United States v. 
Crescendo Bioscience, Inc., 2020 WL 2614959, at *10 (N.D. Cal. May 23, 2020) (“[N]o patient 
likes additional costs; if a lab waives patients’ fees . . . thus allowing physicians to reassure their 
patients that that they will not be responsible for more than $25, that is something of value to 
physicians and they might be induced to send more patients to that lab.”); Riedel, 332 F. Supp. 
3d at 66 (“Waiving patients' insurance co-payments and deductibles is of significant benefit to 
physicians and their patients: physicians are not forced to explain expensive deductible and co-
payment requirements to angry patients . . . Physicians market free testing to their patients to 

make their offices more appealing, thereby improving the physicians' revenues.”).   
      2.   Inducement of Claims                                       
 Next, the complaint plausibly alleges that this remuneration structure induced Medicare 
claims for Eylea.  It alleges that because “CDF was using Regeneron’s money to ensure that 
physicians did not need to consider the impact of Medicare co-pays when deciding to purchase 
and prescribe Eylea,” patients had every incentive to choose the $1,850-per-dose Eylea, without 
even considering the (allegedly) comparably effective, $55-per-dose off-label drug Avastin.  
(Compl. ¶¶ 30, 70).  That this “influence[d] decisions on the provision of health care,” Guilfoile, 
913 F.3d at 193, or “impermissibly influence[d] beneficiaries’ drug choice,” 70 Fed. Reg. 70627, 
is a reasonable inference:  physicians, being practical, do not wish to prescribe medications that 
patients cannot afford, especially with a “buy and bill” drug where physicians themselves bear 
the financial risk of not being able to collect the copay.  (Compl. ¶ 30).  It is also supported by 
the complaint’s allegation that in 2014, a shortfall in CDF funds caused a “large retina clinic” to 

switch its patients to Avastin—a fact that Regeneron senior management regarded with alarm 
and used to justify increasing the company’s CDF donations.  (Compl. ¶ 67). 
 Defendant contends that the complaint fails to allege that the CDF donations actually did 
“improperly influence” or “impermissibly influence” doctors’ and patients’ decision to purchase 
Eylea.  See Guilfoile, 913 F.3d at 192-93; 70 Fed. Reg. 70627.  First, it contends that the 
structure of CDF made this impossible:  because CDF allocated its AMD grants on a first-come, 
first-served basis, and defendant did not control CDF or earmark its donations solely for Eylea 
patients, it argues that the prospect of copay-assistance remuneration to patients could not 
“induce” physicians to prescribe Eylea, because physicians could not guarantee to patients that 
their Eylea prescriptions would be covered by CDF copay assistance.  Nor, it argues, could it 

“induce” patients to purchase Eylea, because physicians submitted the application for CDF 
copay assistance after prescribing and administering the injection to the patient.  But the 
complaint plausibly alleges that the expectation of copay assistance through CDF did change 
prescriber behavior, as evidenced by physicians’ practice of switching to the cheaper Avastin 
when CDF warned that copay assistance would not be available.             
 Defendant further contends its CDF donations did not “improperly influence decisions on 
. . . health care,” because Eylea was the best clinical choice, cheaper than Lucentis and not “off-
label” like Avastin.  Guifoile at 192-93.  However, to state an AKS violation, the complaint need 
not allege that the kickbacks actually corrupted clinical decision-making or provide “proof that 
the underlying medical care would not have been provided but for a kickback.”  U.S. ex rel. 
Greenfield v. Medco Health Solutions, Inc., 880 F.3d 89, 96 (3rd Cir. 2018).  See also U.S. ex 
rel. Bawduniak v. Biogen Idec, Inc., 2018 WL 1996829, at *3 (D. Mass. Apr. 27, 2018) (“It is 
sufficient to show that Defendant paid kickbacks to a physician for the purpose of inducing the 

physician to prescribe specific drugs, and that the physician then prescribed those drugs, even if 
the physician would have prescribed those drugs absent the kickback.”); U.S. ex rel. Kester v. 
Novartis Pharm. Corp., 23 F. Supp. 3d 242, 263 (S.D.N.Y. 2014) (“[I]t is the kickback 
arrangement itself that constitutes the AKS violation, not the success of the arrangement.  The 
illegal [that is, tainted by kickbacks] recommendations . . . do not have to actually convince 
someone to purchase the drugs who would not have otherwise done so.”).  Here, it is sufficient 
that the complaint plausibly alleges that the copay-assistance system established by CDF and 
defendant involved the payment of kickbacks or remuneration to patients and physicians.  Some 
of those kickback-tainted prescriptions then led to Medicare claims for Eylea—in part by 
removing financial considerations, a factor that the Medicare copay program intended for 

patients to consider, from patients’ decision-making.                     
 Defendant also contends that the complaint fails to allege a quid pro quo between 
defendant and patients or physicians.  The AKS bars companies from offering remuneration or 
kickbacks “to induce” a person to purchase or recommend a Medicare-subsidized product, and it 
bars physicians and patients from receiving remuneration “in return for” making those purchases 
or recommendations.  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(b)(1)(B), (b)(2)(B).  According to defendant, the 
complaint must allege a quid pro quo exchange, such as an allegation that CDF would provide 
copay reimbursements only if a physician prescribed Eylea.  However, the AKS does not require 
evidence of an explicit quid pro quo, or a guarantee that all of the remuneration flowing to the 
physician or patient must directly subsidize prescriptions for defendant’s drugs, as defendant 
appears to claim here.  See, e.g., Bawduniak, 2018 WL 1996829, at *3 (to plead AKS violation, 
“[r]elators need not show that a quid pro quo exchange occurred”); United States v. Teva Pharm. 
USA, Inc., 2019 WL 1245656, at *10 (S.D.N.Y. Feb. 27, 2019) (same).  At any rate, the 

complaint does plausibly allege that patients received copay-assistance grants “in return for” 
purchasing Eylea, and physicians received remuneration in the form of satisfied patients, time 
saved on explaining copays, and lowered financial risk of not being able to collect copays, “in 
return for” prescribing Eylea—one of two drugs that physicians knew could be subsidized by the 
CDF fund.                                                                 
 Defendant cites United States v. Celgene Corp., 226 F. Supp. 3d 1032, 1057 (C.D. Cal. 
2016) for the proposition that absent “evidence that [defendant’s] donations [to CDF] were 
contingent on the foundation’s agreement to purchase or recommend [defendant’s] drugs . . . [it] 
cannot be liable [under the AKS] for giving money to co-pay foundations.”  But Celgene is of 
course not binding upon this Court, and in any event is clearly distinguishable.  First, in Celgene, 

the CDF sub-fund subsidized ten medications, only three of which were manufactured by the 
defendant, id. at 1057 n.33; here, the CDF fund subsidized only Eylea and Lucentis, and CDF 
provided defendant with specific information about the proportion of the fund subsidizing Eylea.  
Second, the complaint here plausibly alleges that defendant refused to provide substantial 
funding to CDF until it received data about its subsidies of Eylea, both historic and projected.  
(Compl. ¶¶ 40-45).  In short, the complaint has alleged that even absent an explicit agreement 
that defendant would fund CDF only if it subsidized Eylea, practically speaking, the limited 
scope of the two-drug fund and defendant’s use of Eylea-specific data to set its contribution 
amounts made its donations functionally contingent upon CDF’s Eylea subsidies. 
      3.   Defendant’s Intent to Induce Claims                        
 Next, the complaint plausibly alleges that defendant intended for its CDF donations to 
induce Medicare claims for Eylea.  Sherman, a former senior director for reimbursement, 
testified that Regeneron’s senior management did not wish for its CDF donations to go toward 

copays for Lucentis, its competitor.  (Compl. ¶¶ 39-41).  To that end, CDF regularly sent 
defendant drug-specific data about the number and cost of Eylea prescriptions funded by CDF, 
and precise requests for just enough donation money to fund its projected expenditures on Eylea 
patients—not Lucentis patients—going forward.  (Compl. ¶¶ 42-70).  According to the 
complaint, defendant’s donations in the period 2011-2014 closely tracked CDF’s donation 
requests, which Daniels, an employee working in the reimbursements department, testified were 
tailored “to cover costs for Eylea only.”  (Compl. ¶¶ 45, 65).  Defendant incorporated the 
expectation of CDF-funded Eylea copay waivers into its business decisions, calculating the 
“return on investment” in Medicare payments for every dollar donated to CDF, and relying on 
CDF-funded copay assistance in setting its retail price of Eylea high in order to maximize 

Medicare reimbursements.  (Compl. ¶¶ 36-38, 46-47, 60).  Furthermore, the alleged efforts by 
senior managers to conceal their use of drug-specific data from internal auditors could be 
evidence of defendant’s improper intent to use CDF as a conduit to reimburse patients and 
influence their drug choice.  (Compl. ¶¶ 75-88).  Those allegations, if proved, could support an 
inference that defendant’s intent was more than a vague “hope or expectation” that Eylea 
purchases would increase following donations to CDF.  McClatchey, 217 F.3d at 834 n.7. 
 Defendant contends its only intent in making CDF donations was charitable:  it meant to 
keep the AMD fund solvent so that patients could receive assistance, regardless of therapy.  It 
characterizes its communications with CDF, including discussion of ROI (return on investment), 
as entirely proper business discussions of “how the charity operated, whether donations were 
spent responsibly, and what level of funding would help accomplish the charity’s goals.”  (Def. 
Mem. at 19).  It relies upon United States v. Pfizer for the principle that monitoring return on 
investment of a program is unremarkable for a for-profit corporation, and is not necessarily 

evidence that the program is meant to induce improper referrals.  188 F. Supp. 3d 122, 134 (D. 
Mass. 2016), aff’d, 847 F.3d 52 (1st Cir. 2017).  Therefore, according to defendant, the prospect 
of copay assistance to subsidize Eylea was a “collateral hope or expectation” resulting from its 
CDF donations, not a “motivating factor” for those donations.  McClatchey, 217 F.3d at 834 n.7. 
 While that may be a reasonable interpretation of the facts alleged, the complaint also 
alleges facts that give rise to a reasonable inference that defendant’s intent was improper.  
Although the “return on investment” analysis of CDF donations, without more, may not be 
sufficient to suggest improper intent, the complaint sufficiently alleges other indicia of improper 
intent, such as the data-sharing and donation-matching coordination between CDF and defendant 
and an attempt to conceal that coordination from internal audit.  Ultimately, defendant’s intent is 

a “difficult factual determination” that should be left for a jury to decide, rather than the court at 
the motion-to-dismiss stage.  McClatchey, 217 F.3d at 834 n.7.            
 Nor can defendant establish at this stage that its intent was categorically proper based on 
the “safe harbor” described in the 2005 HHS-OIG guidance.  Under that provision, a 
pharmaceutical company whose donations to copay-assistance charities follow certain procedural 
safeguards would “raise few, if any, anti-kickback statute concerns.”  HHS-OIG, Special 
Advisory Bulletin on Patient Assistance Programs for Medicare Part D Enrollees, 70 Fed. Reg. 
70623 (Nov. 22, 2005).  One of those safeguards is that “the pharmaceutical manufacturer does 
not solicit or receive data from the charity that would facilitate the manufacturer in correlating 
the amount or frequency of its donations with the number of subsidized prescriptions for its 
products.”  Id. at 70626.  The bulletin specifically calls the sharing of drug-specific, non-
aggregate data between a charity and a pharmaceutical company “problematic” in terms of AKS 
concerns.  Id at 70626 n.16.  Here, the complaint alleges that defendant solicited and received 

drug-specific, non-aggregated data from CDF about Eylea patients’ utilization of the Fund in 
order to correlate the amount and frequency of its donations with the number of CDF-subsidized 
Eylea prescriptions.  While “guidance documents cannot by themselves create binding 
requirements that do not already exist by statute or regulation,” DOJ Justice Manual § 1-20.100, 
and defendant cannot be found liable simply for the act of violating guidance, its failure to 
follow HHS-OIG guidance can certainly be evidence of unlawful intent to violate the AKS.  The 
complaint plausibly alleges a claim that defendant’s practices of sharing data with CDF and 
matching its donations to CDF’s Eylea-specific requests, in violation of HHS-OIG guidance, 
made CDF unlawfully “function as a conduit for payments by the pharmaceutical manufacturer 
to patients.”  70 Fed. Reg. 70627.                                        

 Other courts have concluded that pharmaceutical companies’ donations to copay-
assistance charities may violate the AKS when they act as a conduit for money from the 
company to the patient and impermissibly influence patients’ drug choice.  A complaint alleging 
that a pharmaceutical company’s donations to a CDF sub-fund designated to cover copays for 
only one drug, manufactured by that company, survived a motion to dismiss in U.S. ex rel. 
Strunck v. Mallinckrodt Ard LLC, 2020 WL 362717 (E.D. Pa. Jan 22, 2020).  That company, like 
defendant here, allegedly “received financial reports from CDF containing information regarding 
the number of patients enrolled, the amount the fund paid out, the percentage of patients who 
were approved for subsidies, the average copay amount for those patients, and more”—all in 
violation of HHS-OIG guidance concerning non-aggregated data sharing.  Id. at *3.  Because the 
pharmaceutical company’s drug was the only one covered by the CDF fund, the company was 
able to ensure that its CDF donations directly correlated with the number of subsidized drug 
prescriptions.  Id.  In U.S. ex rel. Vitale v. MiMedx Group, Inc., the complaint sufficiently 

alleged an AKS violation where it claimed that defendant, a pharmaceutical manufacturer, 
“knowingly and willfully paid a remuneration, here Medicare coinsurance and copays, indirectly 
via its correlated charitable contribution funding of PAN [a copay-assistance foundation], to 
induce patients on Medicare to purchase [the] defendant’s products,” a line of drugs called 
EpiFix.  381 F. Supp. 3d 647, 659 (2019).  The pharmaceutical manufacturer would encourage 
sales representatives to fill out applications for copay assistance for patients, receive data from 
the sales representatives about the number of patients seeking copay assistance for prescriptions 
of EpiFix, fund the foundation in exact amounts correlated to that number, and then tell the sales 
representatives to rush to submit their copay-assistance applications for EpiFix to PAN after the 
donations were finalized, in order to maximize the likelihood that the manufacturer’s donations 

would flow directly to subsidizing its own drugs.  Id.                    
 It is true that here, defendant’s coordination with the charity appears to be less close, and 
its anticipation that charitable donations would flow through to subsidize its own products less 
certain, than in those cases.  Unlike Mallinckrodt, which concerned a single-drug fund, 
defendant’s donations to CDF’s AMD fund contributed to offsetting the copays of both its own 
drug, Eylea, and its competitor’s drug, Lucentis; unlike MiMedx, there is no evidence that 
defendant’s employees helped patients prepare applications to CDF for copay assistance or gave 
them strategic advice about when to submit them.  But while defendant’s alleged behavior here 
does not quite rise to the level of those cases, the complaint nonetheless is sufficient to allege a 
plausible claim of a violation.                                           
 In summary, the complaint alleges that defendant paid remuneration to patients, through 
donations to CDF, in order to induce physicians to recommend Medicare-subsidized purchases 
of defendant’s drugs and to induce patients to purchase those drugs. The complaint thus alleges 

sufficient facts to support each material element of an AKS violation.    
 C.   Whether the Complaint Sufficiently Pleads that Defendant’s Donations 
      Resulted in False Claims                                        

 Any claim for Medicare reimbursement “that includes items or services resulting from a 
violation of [the AKS] constitutes a false or fraudulent claim for the purposes of [the FCA].”  42 
U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(g).  In other words, “an AKS violation that results in a federal health care 
payment is a per se false claim under the FCA.”  Guilfoile v. Shields, 913 F.3d 178, 190 (1st Cir. 
2019) (quoting U.S. ex rel. Lutz v. United States, 853 F.3d 131, 135 (4th Cir. 2017)). 
 Defendant contends that the complaint does not alleges that its donations to CDF, even if 
they were a violation of the AKS, resulted in any false claims being filed.  Essentially, because 
Regeneron was not the only donor to the CDF fund, it contends that the government cannot show 
that any specific Medicare claim for Eylea “result[ed] from” an AKS-violating donation by it (as 
opposed to a donation from its competitor, Genentech).  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(g).   
 That argument reads a specificity into the False Claims Act that is unsupported by the 
text of the statute or case law.  The AKS bars both direct and indirect payment of remuneration 
in return for purchases or referrals.  42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b.  Here, there were only two donors to 
the fund.  (Compl. ¶ 33).  Moreover, the complaint alleges that defendant was a principal donor 
to the fund, without whose contributions the fund would cease to exist altogether.  (Id. ¶¶ 48, 50, 
53).  Thus, but for defendant’s contributions, patients would not receive Eylea copay subsidies 
from CDF.  And those contributions “result[ed] in” Medicare claims, because patients who 
illegally received Eylea copay assistance from CDF subsequently presented claims to Medicare 
for the remainder of the drug price.  Therefore, the complaint has adequately alleged the 
existence of “AKS violation[s] that result[] in a federal health care payment,” which are “per se 
false claim[s] under the FCA.”  Guilfoile, 913 F.3d at 190.               

 Defendant’s reliance on U.S. ex rel. Greenfield v. Medco Health Solutions, Inc., 880 F.3d 
89 (3rd Cir. 2018), is unavailing.  In that case, the complaint sufficiently pleaded an AKS 
violation where it alleged that defendant Medco donated to a hemophilia charity in return for that 
charity recommending Medco’s services to patients.  Id. at 97-98.  The charity’s referral list was 
an “illegal referral or recommendation” tainted by kickbacks.  Id. at 99.  However, the court 
found that the complaint did not plead an FCA violation because there was no evidence that any 
of the patients who submitted allegedly-suspect Medicare claims for Medco’s services had 
actually viewed the charity’s (illegal) referral list or otherwise communicated with the charity.  
Id. at 100.  That was fatal at the summary judgment stage, because the plaintiff needed to “point 
to at least one [Medicare] claim that covered a patient” who had actually been “exposed” to the 

illegal referral program, and failed to do so.  Id. at 99.  Here, in contrast, the complaint identifies 
at least eleven distinct claims for patients that were “exposed” to an “illegal referral or 
recommendation.”  (Compl. ¶¶ 98-101).  The complaint alleges that those eleven claimants 
received illegal copay subsidies from CDF, and submitted Medicare claims for the remainder of 
the price of Eylea.                                                       
 Other district courts have concluded, based on Medco, that a complaint sufficiently states 
a violation of the FCA if it alleges that “[d]efendant paid kickbacks to physicians . . . to induce 
those physicians to prescribe particular medications, and that the physicians then prescribed 
those medications, causing claims to be submitted to Medicare and Medicaid.”  U.S. ex rel. 
Bawduniak v. Biogen Idec, Inc., 2018 WL 1996829, at *6 (D. Mass. Apr. 27, 2018); see also 
U.S. ex rel. Wallace v. Exactech, Inc., 2020 WL 4500493 (N.D. Ala. Aug. 5, 2020) (complaint 
sufficiently stated FCA violation where it alleged that defendant provided illegal kickbacks to 
physician, who subsequently prescribed defendant’s devices for twelve patients and submitted 

Medicare claims for them); United States v. Medtronic, 189 F. Supp. 3d 259, 272-73 (D. Mass. 
2016) (complaint sufficiently stated FCA violation where it identified specific doctors who billed 
Medicare for defendant’s products after receiving kickbacks from defendant).  Similarly, the 
complaint’s allegations that at least eleven claimants who received the tainted copay subsidies 
submitted claims to Medicare are sufficient to state an FCA violation at the motion to dismiss 
stage.                                                                    
 D.   Whether the Complaint Pleads the AKS Violation and Resulting False 
      Claims with Particularity Required by Rule 9(b)                 

 Because the False Claims Act is a statute directed at fraudulent conduct, Rule 9(b) 
“requires both that the circumstances of the alleged fraud and the claims themselves be alleged 
with particularity.”  Lawton ex rel. United States v. Takeda Pharm. Co., Ltd., 842 F.3d 125, 130 
(1st Cir. 2016); Fed. R. Civ. P. 9(b).   The plaintiff must “set forth with particularity the who, 
what, when, where, and how of the alleged fraud.” U.S. ex rel. Ge v. Takeda Pharm. Co. Ltd., 
737 F.3d 116, 123 (1st Cir. 2013) (internal citations and quotation marks omitted).  Where it is 
alleged that defendant caused a third party to submit a false claim to the government, rather than 
submitting the false claim itself, a “more flexible” standard applies, under which Rule 9(b) is 
satisfied by providing “factual or statistical evidence to strengthen the inference of fraud beyond 
possibility without necessarily providing details as to each false claim submitted.”  U.S. ex rel. 
Kelly v. Novartis Pharm. Co., 827 F.3d 5, 13 (1st Cir. 2016) (quoting U.S. ex rel. Duxbury v. 
Ortho Biotech Products, L.P., 579 F.3d 13, 29 (1st Cir. 2009)).  Rule 9(b) may be satisfied 
“where, although some questions remain unanswered, the complaint as a whole is sufficiently 
particular to pass muster under the FCA.”  U.S. ex rel. Gagne v. City of Worcester, 565 F.3d 40, 
45 (1st Cir. 2009).                                                       
 While there is no “checklist of mandatory requirements that each allegation in a 

complaint must meet to satisfy Rule 9(b),” Hagerty ex rel. United States v. Cyberonics, Inc., 844 
F.3d 26, 31 (1st Cir. 2016), the First Circuit has identified some examples of specific allegations 
that may suffice to state a claim with the requisite particularity.  In an FCA case, these may 
include “details concerning the dates of the claims, the content of the forms or bills submitted, 
their identification numbers, the amount of money charged to the government, the particular 
goods or services for which the government was billed, the individuals involved in the billing, 
and the length of time between the alleged fraudulent practices and the submission of claims 
based on those practices.”  U.S. ex rel. Karvelas v. Melrose-Wakefield Hosp., 360 F.3d 220, 233 
(1st Cir. 2004), abrogated on other grounds by Allison Engine Co. v. United States ex rel. 
Sanders, 553 U.S. 662 (2008).  Here, the complaint has provided identifying information about 

eleven specific false claims submitted to Medicare: their date, location, product and billing code 
for which reimbursement was sought, patient identity, the amount billed to Medicare, and the 
amount billed to CDF.  (Compl. ¶ 101).                                    
 The First Circuit has found that a complaint satisfies Rule 9(b) even when it fails to 
identify specific false claims, as long as it describes “each of the eight medical providers [that 
submitted fraudulent claims] (the who), the illegal kickbacks (the what), the rough time periods 
and locations (the where and when), and the filing of the false claims themselves,” although this 
was a “close call.”  U.S. ex rel. Duxbury v. Ortho Biotech Prod., L.P., 579 F.3d 13, 30 (1st Cir. 
2009).  The complaint here similarly identifies eleven claimants who submitted kickback-tainted 
Medicare claims (the who), the illegal kickbacks through CDF-funded copay subsidies (the 
what), defendant’s coordination with CDF to ensure that Eylea prescriptions were adequately 
funded (the how), and the locations and dates of the Eylea injections that spurred Medicare 
claims (the when and where).  It is true that the complaint does not identify the medical providers 

who administered the injections and submitted the Medicare claims on behalf of the identified 
patients.  However, as a whole, the complaint provides more detail than Duxbury in identifying 
each specific false claim made, which is sufficient to satisfy Rule 9(b). 
 In sum, by describing defendant’s allegedly illegal coordination with CDF to provide 
Eylea-specific copay subsidies in violation of the AKS in 2011-2014, and identifying eleven 
specific Medicare claims made by CDF-subsidized patients in 2013-2014, the complaint has 
alleged “both the circumstances of the alleged fraud and the claims themselves” with the 
particularity necessary to satisfy Rule 9(b).  Lawton, 842 F.3d at 130.   
 E.   Whether the Government is Restricting Charitable Speech in Violation of 
      Defendant’s First Amendment Rights                              

 Defendant contends that this lawsuit constitutes an impermissible restriction on its 
charitable speech under the First Amendment.  According to defendant, under the government’s 
theory, donations to CDF would be perfectly legal in a vacuum, but they become illegal when 
coupled with the communication between CDF and defendant about CDF’s funding needs.  
Therefore, defendant contends, the government is essentially penalizing speech. 
 Charitable solicitation is “fully protected speech,” Bd. of Trustees of State Univ. of New 
York v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 474 (1989), and the “protection afforded is to the communication, to 
its source and to its recipients both.”  Va. State Bd. of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens Consumer 
Council, Inc., 425 U.S. 748, 756 (1976).  Laws that impose speech limitations “restricting the 
solicitation of contributions to charity” are subject to strict scrutiny, and may only pass 
constitutional muster if they are narrowly tailored to serve a compelling government interest.  
Williams-Yulee v. Florida Bar, 575 U.S. 433, 442 (2015) (citing Riley v. National Federation of 
the Blind of N.C., Inc., 487 U.S. 781, 789 (1988)).                       
 Defendant contends that the “restrictions” placed on its communications with CDF do not 

survive strict-scrutiny review, because they are not narrowly tailored to prevent fraud and abuse 
in the health care system, an aim that could be accomplished by less restrictive means, namely 
enforcing the AKS based on conduct and not speech.  Defendant characterizes the “restrictions” 
as impermissibly content-based, because they proscribe the sharing of content that “would 
facilitate the manufacturer in correlating . . . its donations with . . . prescriptions,” 70 Fed. Reg. 
70626, and viewpoint-based, because they proscribe pharmaceutical manufacturers (but not other 
parties) from sharing this type of content with charities.  “Content-based regulations are 
presumptively invalid.”  R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, 505 U.S. 377, 382 (1999).  In Sorrell v. IMS 
Health Inc., the Supreme Court struck down a state statute prohibiting the sharing of prescriber-
identifying information between pharmacies and pharmaceutical manufacturers for marketing 

purposes as an impermissibly content-based restriction on speech.  564 U.S. 552 (2011). 
 However, this case is about restrictions on conduct—donations to CDF that functioned as 
kickbacks—not restrictions on speech.  The complaint does not allege that defendant violated the 
law when it solicited and shared data from CDF concerning Eylea subsidies.  Rather, the 
complaint alleges that defendant violated the law when it made financial contributions to CDF 
that were carefully tailored to fund Eylea prescriptions.  A pharmaceutical manufacturer has no 
First Amendment right to pay kickbacks intended to induce prescriptions and purchases of its 
drugs.  Unlike the cases cited by defendant, which involved the imposition of criminal or civil 
penalties for speech and information-sharing itself, this complaint only alleges that defendant’s 
donations, not its communications, were illegal.  See, e.g., Speet v. Schuette, 726 F.3d 867 (6th 
Cir. 2013) (statute that criminalized begging); Williams-Yulee, 575 U.S. 433 (local bar rule 
banning judicial candidate from soliciting campaign donations); Riley, 487 U.S. 781 (regulations 
requiring paid fundraisers to disclose their fee to potential donors and barring them from 

soliciting donations absent a license); Sorrell, 564 U.S. 552 (statute prohibiting data-sharing 
between pharmaceutical companies and pharmacies).                         
 The complaint treats specific communications between defendant and CDF not as the 
violation itself, but rather, as evidence of defendant’s intent to violate the AKS.  “The First 
Amendment . . . does not prohibit the evidentiary use of speech to establish the elements of a 
crime or to prove motive or intent.”  Wisconsin v. Mitchell, 508 U.S. 476, 489 (1993) (upholding 
sentencing enhancement because defendant intentionally selected his victim on account of his 
race and permitting introduction of defendant’s statements targeting a specific race).  Nor does 
the First Amendment protect “speech or writing used as an integral part of conduct in violation 
of a valid criminal statute.”  Giboney v. Empire Storage & Ice Co., 336 U.S. 490, 498 (1949) 

(upholding injunction restraining defendants from picketing, where picketing was integral part of 
a scheme to violate state anti-trade restraint law).   The complaint has sufficiently alleged that 
defendant’s constant, close communications with CDF (not the proscribed conduct) demonstrate 
its improper intent for its CDF donations to impermissibly influence patients’ drug choices and 
to pass through CDF as a mere conduit for payments to patients, in violation of the AKS (the 
proscribed conduct).                                                      
 Other courts considering First Amendment challenges to alleged AKS violations have 
rejected them on the basis that the AKS criminalizes conduct (remunerations), not speech.  See, 
e.g., U.S. ex rel. Nevyas v. Allergan, Inc., 2015 WL 3429381, at *1 n.1 (E.D. Pa. May 26, 2015) 
(“Relators allege a scheme by Allergan to induce physicians to write prescriptions for Allergan 
products in violation of the AKS; it is Allergan's conduct in providing ‘illegal remuneration’ to 
physicians and optometrists and not its speech that is at issue in the AKS claim.”); United States 
v. Mathur, 2012 WL 4742833, at *4 (D. Nev. Sept. 13, 2012), report and recommendation 

adopted, 2012 WL 4711960 (D. Nev. Oct. 3, 2012) (“Courts have uniformly rejected the notion 
that bribery is protected speech . . . The Indictment alleges Mathur made payments ranging from 
$1,500 to $5,400 in exchange for patient referrals. The Anti–Kickback Act criminalizes corrupt 
payments in exchange for referrals, not statements related to those payments.”).  Defendant has 
cited no cases in which a court has found that an AKS prosecution violates the First Amendment. 
 It is hardly a novel legal theory that speech may provide evidence of a crime, or be an 
integral part of a crime, without running afoul of the First Amendment.  For example, 
communicating confidential information about a company may be protected speech, but insider 
trading based on that information is not.  Soliciting donations for a political campaign may be 
protected speech, but making a deal to award government contracts to donors is not.  Describing 

an urge to attack members of a certain race may be protected speech, but actually inciting 
imminent violence, or attacking them, based on racial hatred is not.  See Mitchell, 508 U.S. 476.  
Similarly, communicating with charities about their spending on specific drugs may be protected 
speech, but making donations to induce claims for one’s own drugs based on that information is 
not.  Accordingly, this action will not be dismissed on the ground that it seeks to impose liability 
in violation of the First Amendment.                                      
 F.   Whether the Lawsuit Violates Defendant’s Fifth Amendment Due Process 
      Rights                                                          

 Finally, defendant contends that this action violates its due-process rights under the Fifth 
Amendment because the government’s theory of liability rests on non-binding OIG guidance, 
which is impermissibly vague and fails to provide fair notice of prohibited behavior. 
 “Guidance documents cannot by themselves create binding requirements that do not 
already exist by statute or regulation.”  DOJ Justice Manual § 1-20.100.  Defendant contends that 
it is being charged with violating non-binding HHS-OIG guidance, rather than the Anti-

Kickback Statute itself, 42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b.  However, the complaint does not allege that 
defendant’s failure to comply with 2005 HHS-OIG guidance concerning data-sharing with CDF, 
70 Fed. Reg. 70623, was the conduct that violated the law.  Rather, defendant’s donations to 
CDF as a conduit to pay remuneration to physicians and patients, in order to induce Medicare 
claims for Eylea, was the offending conduct.  The complaint cited the 2005 guidance for two 
purposes:  first, to show that defendant had received warnings that its conduct was illegal, 
therefore supporting the AKS element of “knowing and willing” mens rea; and second, to 
provide evidence of defendant’s intent for its donations to function as kickbacks. 
 Defendant also argues that the 2005 HHS-OIG guidance, 70 Fed. Reg. 70623, is 
impermissibly vague and fails to give fair notice of prohibited conduct in violation of its due-

process rights.  See United States v. Paz-Alvarez, 799 F.3d 12, 28 (1st Cir. 2015) (“[T]he Fifth 
Amendment Due Process Clause gives [defendants] a right to fair warning of [the] conduct 
which will give rise to criminal penalties . . . [T]he vagueness doctrine . . . bars enforcement of a 
statute which either forbids or requires the doing of an act in terms so vague that men of common 
intelligence must necessarily guess at its meaning and differ as to its application.”); United States 
v. Lachman, 387 F.3d 42, 56 (1st Cir. 2004) (an offense must be defined with “sufficient 
definiteness that ordinary people can understand what conduct is prohibited”).  Specifically, 
defendants challenge the HHS-OIG statement that “the pharmaceutical manufacturer does not 
solicit or receive data from the charity that would facilitate the manufacturer in correlating the 
amount or frequency of its donations with the number of subsidized prescriptions for its 
products” in order to avoid AKS concerns as impermissibly vague, failing to describe what data 
a pharmaceutical company may or may not share with a charity.  70 Fed. Reg. 70626.   
 However, the vagueness doctrine may not apply, as the guidance does not “give rise to 

criminal penalties,” Paz-Alvarez at 28, or define a “criminal offense,” Lachman at 56.  It is not a 
statute, nor even a regulation.  Furthermore, and in any event, the guidance is not unduly vague.  
Its plain text suggests that sharing data about the “number of subsidized prescriptions for [the 
pharmaceutical company’s] products” may implicate the AKS.  70 Fed. Reg. 70626.  And the 
accompanying footnote specifically warns that sharing data that is “patient specific,” “related to 
the identity, amount, or nature of subsidized drugs,” or “not in the aggregate” could raise 
“problematic” AKS concerns.  Id. n.16.  The guidance is specific enough to warn an ordinary 
person of prohibited conduct.                                             
 In short, defendant had fair notice of the prohibited conduct, and the action will not be 
dismissed on the ground that the enforcement of the statute violates its due-process rights under 

the Fifth Amendment.                                                      
IV.   Conclusion                                                          
 For the foregoing reasons, defendant’s motion to dismiss the complaint is DENIED. 

So Ordered.                                                               

                               /s/ F. Dennis Saylor IV                
                               F. Dennis Saylor IV                    
Dated:  December 4, 2020           Chief Judge, United States District Court