IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                        
                FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO                          

    United States of America,                                            
            Plaintiff                                                    
               v.                                                        
   Ernst Jacob and Shipowners                                            
 Insurance and Guaranty Company                                          
              Ltd.,                                                      
           Defendants.                                                   
Shipowners Insurance and Guaranty                                        
         Company, Ltd.,                                                  
      Third-Party Plaintiff                                              
               v.                                                        
 Margara Shipping Company, Ltd.                                          
and Steamship Mutual Underwriting                                        
       Association, Ltd.,                                                
     Third-Party Defendants.      Civil No. 21-1594(GMM)                 
          Ernst Jacob,                                                   
      Third-Party Plaintiff                                              
               v.                                                        
  Steamship Mutual Underwriting                                          
       Association, Ltd.,                                                
     Third-Party Defendant.                                              
    Department of Natural and                                            
 Environmental Resources of the                                          
  Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,                                           
      Plaintiff-Intervenor                                               
               v.                                                        
   Ernst Jacob and Shipowners                                            
 Insurance and Guaranty Company                                          
              Ltd.,                                                      
           Defendants.                                                   

                          OPINION AND ORDER                              
    Before  the  Court  is  the  Third-Party  Defendant’s  Steamship     
Mutual  Underwriting  Association  Limited’s  Motion  for  an  Order      
Compelling Arbitration and Stay of the Third-Party Complaint of           
Shipowners Insurance and Guaranty Company, Ltd And Memorandum of          
Law in Support Thereof (“Steamship’s Motions to Compel Arbitration       
and  Motion  to  Stay”)(Docket  No.  87)  and  Third-Party  Plaintiff     
Shipowners Insurance and Guaranty Company, Ltd.’s (“SIGCo”) Motion        
for Oral Argument on the Motion to Compel Arbitration. (“SIGCo’s          

Motion for Oral Argument”)(Docket No. 132). For the reasons stated        
below, Steamship’s Motion to Compel Arbitration and Motion to Stay        
are GRANTED and SIGCo’s Motion for Oral Argument is rendered MOOT.        
                 I.  RELEVANT FACTUAL BACKGROUND                         
A.   The grounding of the T/V Margara                                     

    On April 27, 2006, a 748-foot double-hulled, ice strengthened        
tanker carrying approximately 315,693 barrels of No. 6 fuel oil —         
the T/V Margara — grounded approximately three miles off the coast        
of Tallaboa, Puerto Rico. (Docket Nos. 9 ¶¶ 35-37; 42 ¶¶ 1,38; and        
39 ¶ 1).                                                                  
    At 6:00 a.m. on April 27, 2006, the U.S. Coast Guard served          
the Master of the T/V Margara with a “Notice of Federal interest          
For An Oil Spill Incident,” form letter signed by the Federal On-         
Scene  Coordinator  (“FOSC”)  declaring  that  an  oil  pollution         
incident “occurred or threatens to occur.” (Docket Nos. 9 ¶ 48;           
69-4  at  52).  This  determination  triggered  the  initiation  of       
assessment, response, and remediation efforts to mitigate damages         
caused by the incident in accordance with the Oil Pollution Act of        
1990 (“OPA”). (Id.); 33 U.S.C. §§ 2701-2761 (1990). In the decade         
following the T/V Margara’s grounding, the government’s trustees          
at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (“NOAA”)          
and  the  Puerto  Rico  Department  of  Natural  Resources  (“DNER”)      
(collectively “Trustees”) assessed natural resource damages and           
undertook   restoration  actions   to  revitalize   the   damaged         

environment. (Docket Nos. 9 ¶¶ 56, 59-60, 62-66).                         
B.   Parties to the Dispute                                               
    At the time of the grounding event, Third-Party Defendant,           
Margara Shipping Company Ltd. (“Margara”) owned the T/V Margara;          
Defendant Ernst Jacob (“EJ”) was the operator of the T/V Margara;         
Defendant and Third-Party Plaintiff SIGCo was the guarantor of            
Margara;  and  Third-Party  Defendant  Steamship  provided  the  T/V      
Margara, Margara, and EJ with Protection and Indemnity insurance.         
(Docket Nos. 9 ¶¶ 31-34).                                                 
    Margara is a shipping company organized in the Cayman Islands        
and headquartered in Germany. (Docket No. 53 ¶ 2). Margara was the        

registered owner of the T/V Margara in April 2006, the time of the        
ship’s grounding. (Id.)                                                   
    EJ is a company engaged in the primary business of contracting       
with  and  providing  technical  ship  operation  to  vessel  owners.     
(Docket No. 52 at 3). EJ is incorporated and headquartered in             
Hamburg, Germany. (Docket No. 87 at 12.) At the time of the T/V           
Margara’s grounding, EJ was the operator of the ship. (Id.).              
    SIGCo is a company whose primary business is the provision of        
financial  guarantees  for  “responsible  parties”  for   vessels         
crossing U.S. navigable waters subject to OPA. (Docket No. 87 at         
11.) It is headquartered and incorporated in Bermuda. (Id.) On            
November  13,  2003,  SIGCo  and  Margara  entered  a   Financial         
Responsibility Guaranty Contract (“COFR Guaranty”) which provided         

Margara with the Certificate of Financial Responsibility (“COFR”)         
required under OPA to navigate in U.S. waters. (Docket No. 53 at          
6).                                                                       
    Clause  1  of  the  COFR  Guaranty  between  SIGCo  and  Margara     
required that Margara possess protection and indemnity coverage           
“for full protection and indemnity risks as defined in and subject        
to the terms and conditions of the rules of the Club under law            
including, but not limited to, OPA 1990 and CERCLA in no less than        
the Standard Amount.”1 (Id. ¶ 10). Margara did so with Steamship          
prior to applying for the COFR with SIGCo. (Id. ¶ 11). The COFR           
Guaranty agreement was in place in April of 2006 and thus, SIGCo          
was the guarantor of the T/V Margara at the time of the ship’s            

grounding. (Docket No. 53 at 6).                                          
    Steamship is a Protection and Indemnity Association made up          
of  member  shipowners  who  collectively  provide  enrolled  members     
with certain marine insurance. (Docket Nos. 53 ¶ 3; 87 at 12). It         
is organized and headquartered in the United Kingdom. (Docket No.         
87 at 12). At the time of the 2006 grounding event, both EJ and           


1 At the time of the grounding of the Margara, the “standard amount” was  
approximately 500 million dollars. (Docket No. 53 ¶ 10).                  
Margara were members of Steamship and the T/V Margara was listed         
as  a  vessel  covered  by  Steamship’s  Protection  and  Indemnity       
Insurance  Policy  for  Policy  year  2006-2007  (“P&I  Policy”  or       
“Policy”). (Docket No. 53 ¶ 3).2                                          

C.   Steamship’s P&I Policy                                               

    At  the  time  of  the  T/V  Margara’s  grounding,  Steamship’s      
protection and indemnity coverage was subject to the terms and            
conditions laid out in Steamship’s P&I Rules for policy year 2006-        
2007. In the relevant parts, Rule 25vi of Steamship’s P&I Policy          
Rules  for  2006-2007  protects  and  indemnifies  Steamship  members     
against:                                                                  
    Liabilities, losses, damages, costs and expenses caused              
    by or consequent on the escape or discharge or threatened            
    escape or discharge of oil or any other substance from               
    the entered ship . . . Costs of any measures reasonably              
    taken  for  the  purpose  of  avoiding,  minimising  or              
    cleaning  up  any  pollution,  any  imminent  danger  of             
    pollution,   or   any   resulting   loss,   damage   or              
    contamination, together with any liability for any loss              
    of or damage to property caused by any measures so taken.            
    . .provided always that. . .such liabilities, costs or               
    expenses are not recoverable under the Hull Policies of              
    the entered ship. . .                                                

(Docket No. 87-3 at 50).                                                  



2 On February 28, 2006, Steamship provided a Certificate of Entry to Margara 
Shipping establishing that the T/V Margara was entered with Steamship from 
February 20, 2006 until February 20, 2007, “in accordance with the Rules, to 
the extent specified and in accordance with the Act, By-Laws and the Rules from 
time to time in force….” (Docket No. 87-2 at 1). The Certificate of Entry 
further referred to Steamship’s Rules as governing the terms of “entry,” and 
noted that the “Rules are printed annually in book form. . .” (Id.).      
 Rule 47 of Steamship’s P&I Policy Rules for 2006-2007 provides:         
         In  the  event   of  any  difference  or   dispute              
         whatsoever, between or affecting a Member and the               
         Club and concerning the insurance afforded by the               
         Club under these rules or any amounts due from the              
         Club to the Member or the Member to the Club, such              
         difference or dispute shall in the first instance               
         be referred to adjudication by the Directors. . .               
         If the Member does not accept the decision of the               
         Directors, or if the Managers, in their absolute                
         discretion, so decide, the difference or dispute                
         shall  be  referred  to  the  arbitration  of  three            
         arbitrators, one to be appointed by each of the                 
         parties and the third by the two arbitrators so                 
         chosen, in London. The submission to arbitration                
         and all the proceedings therein shall be subject to             
         the provisions of the English Arbitration Act 1996              
         and  the  schedules   thereto  or  any   statutory              
         modifications or re-enactment thereof . . . These               
         rules  and  any  contract  of  insurance  between  the          
         Club  and  the  Member  shall  be  governed  by  and            
         construed in accordance with English law.                       

(Id. at 82).                                                              
                    II.    PROCEDURAL HISTORY                            
    Pursuant  to   the  T/V   Margara’s   COFR,  Trustees   seek         
reimbursement for recovery of natural resource damages, associated        
administrative  costs,  and  anticipated  costs  of  compensatory         
restoration from SIGCo. (Docket No. 9 at 2).                              
    On  August  30,  2022,  SIGCo  filed  a  Third-Party  Complaint      
against Margara and Steamship (Docket No. 53), alleging among other       
things  that:  (1)  SIGCo  is  entitled  to  recover  from  Steamship,    
Margara’s insurer, for any claims SIGCo must pay to the United            
States, since its COFR Guaranty was dependent upon such coverage          
by the P&I Policy  (Count II); (2)   under 26  P.R. Laws § 2003,          
Steamship, as Margara’s insurer, is directly and fully liable for        
any liabilities that Margara owes under OPA, including those owed         
to SIGCo (Count IV); and (3) SIGCo is entitled to contribution for        
damages from EJ and Margara — and Steamship as their insurer — for        

any OPA liabilities that SIGCo is required to pay.(Docket No. 53          
at 7-11).                                                                 
    On  November  25,  2022,  Steamship  responded  to   SIGCo’s         
complaint arguing, among others, and without submitting to this           
Court’s jurisdiction, that the Court lacked personal jurisdiction         
over it and that SIGCo had no right or cause of action against it,        
direct or otherwise. (Docket No. 86 at 5).                                
    On  that  same  day,  Steamship  filed  its  Motion  to  Compel      
Arbitration  and  Motion  to  Stay.  (Docket  No.  87).  Steamship        
contends,  again  without  submitting  itself  to  this   Court’s         
jurisdiction,  that  the  P&I  Policy  upon  which  SIGCo  bases  its     
direct-action  suit   requires  that  any   dispute  related  to          

Steamship’s  insurance  coverage  be  submitted  to  arbitration  in      
London, UK. (Id. at 2).                                                   
    On January 20, 2023, SIGCo filed a response to Steamship’s           
motion. (Docket No. 121). SIGCo argues that since it was not a            
party to the P&I Policy and it did not agree to the arbitration           
term contained therein, it is not bound to arbitrate under the            
contract. (Id. at 8). SIGCo also posits that the Puerto Rican             
direct-action statute functions to nullify Steamship’s arbitration        
clause since the statute itself states that such claims “may only        
be exercised in Puerto Rico.” (Id. at 21). SIGCo further notes            
that, pursuant to the federal McCarran Ferguson Act (“MFA”), laws         
(including anti-arbitration statutes) regulating the “business of         

insurance”  are  not  preempted  by  conflicting  federal  statutes       
including the FAA and thus the Puerto Rican Insurance Code controls       
the dispute. (Id. at 23).                                                 
    Steamship filed a reply to SIGCo’s response on February 6,           
2023. (Docket No. 131). Therein, Steamship argues that contrary to        
SIGCo’s claims, SIGCo relied on and knowingly benefited from the          
P&I Policy by: (1) invoking the Policy to bring its direct-action         
claim and (2) issuing its COFR Guaranty to Margara with knowledge         
of and because of the Policy. (Docket No. 131 at 7-9). Steamship          
also alleges that SIGCo failed to cite caselaw demonstrating that         
the existence of a valid direct-action statute claim in Puerto            
Rico precludes the initiation of insurance proceedings outside of         

the Commonwealth. (Id. at 9).                                             
    Finally, on February 13, 2023, SIGCo filed a Motion for Oral         
Argument. (Docket No. 132). SIGCo requests the Court grant its            
motion  and  compel  oral  argument  on  whether  the  granting  of       
arbitration proceedings with Steamship should be governed by the          
terms of the direct-action provision in the Puerto Rico Insurance         
Code.  (Id.  at  2).  Specifically,  SIGCo  seeks  oral  argument  on     
meaning of the direct-action statute phrase, “The direct-action           
against the insurer may only be exercised in Puerto Rico.” See 26        
P.R. Laws § 2003; (Id. at 3).                                             
    Before  the  Court  now  are  Steamship’s  Motions  to  Compel       
Arbitration  and  Motion  to  Stay  and  SIGCo’s  Motion  for  Oral       

Argument. The Court will focus its analysis on Steamship’s Motion         
to Compel Arbitration given that the other motions rest on the            
resolution of that matter.                                                
                      III.   LEGAL STANDARD                              
    There is a general preference for arbitration under Puerto           
Rico and Federal Law, as well as the Convention on the Recognition        
and  Enforcement  of  Foreign  Arbitral  Awards,  June  10,  1958,  21    
U.S.T. 2517, 330 U.N.T.S. 3 (“New York Convention”). See 32 P.R.          
Laws Ann. § 3201; Federal Arbitration Act, 9 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq.;         
21   U.S.T.   2519;  See   also   Allied-Bruce   Terminix   Cos.,         
Inc. v. Dobson, 513 U.S. 265 (1995); Quiñones–González v. Asoc.           
Cond.  Playa  Azul  II,  161  D.P.R.  668  (2004).  However,  that        

preference  is  limited  by  the  requirement  that  an  arbitration      
contract is valid and enforceable. See 32 P.R. Laws Ann. § 3201;          
9 U.S.C. § 2; 21 U.S.T. 2519. Thus, in determining whether the            
Court should grant Steamship’s Motion to Compel Arbitration, the          
Court first considers whether the P&I Policy is arbitrable.               
    In granting a motion to compel arbitration, the First Circuit        
establishes four requirements: (1) a valid arbitration agreement;         
(2) the movant’s authority to invoke the arbitration clause; (3)          
the arbitration clause’s binding effect on the nonmovant; and (4)        
the claim’s falling within the scope of the arbitration clause.           
See InterGen N.V. v. Grina, 344 F.3d 134, 142 (1st Cir. 2003). The        
burden on establishing these requirements is placed on the moving         

party. See Air-Con, Inc. v. Daikin Applied Latin Am., LLC, 21 F.4th       
168, 173 (1st Cir. 2021) (quoting Soto-Fonalledas v. Ritz-Carlton         
San Juan Hotel Spa & Casino, 640 F.3d 471, 474 (1st Cir. 2011))           
(“Our  precedent  makes  clear  that  the  party  seeking  to  compel     
arbitration bears the burden of proving “that a valid agreement to        
arbitrate exists.”). See also Rivera-Colón v. AT&T Mobility P.R.,         
Inc., 913 F.3d 200, 207 (1st Cir. 2019); Dialysis Access Ctr., LLC        
v. RMS Lifeline, Inc., 638 F.3d 367, 375 (1st Cir. 2011); Cullinane       
v. Uber Techs., Inc., 893 F.3d 53, 60 (1st Cir. 2018).                    

                      IV.     RELEVANT LAWS                              
A.   OPA                                                                  
    OPA provides a comprehensive liability scheme governing the          
discharge of petroleum products into navigable waters of the United       
States. See 33 U.S.C. §§ 2701-2761. Under OPA, owners, operators,         
and  charterers  of  a  vessel  that  have  discharged  or  caused  a     
substantial threat of a discharge of oil into navigable waters are        
deemed  “responsible  parties”  that  are  strictly  liable  for          
resulting removal costs and damages as outlined in section 2702(b).       
See  33  U.S.C.  § §   2702(a),  2701(14).  As  an  alternative  to       
recovering damages from a responsible party under OPA, damages can        
be recovered from a responsible party’s guarantor. See 33 U.S.C.         
§ 2716(f)(1). Pursuant to  33 U.S.C. § 2701(13), a guarantor is “any      
person, other than the responsible party, who provides evidence of        

financial responsibility for a responsible party under” OPA.              
B.   The Puerto Rico Direct-Action Statute                                
    The Puerto Rico Insurance Code allows injured persons to bring       
direct-actions  in  Puerto  Rico  against  the  insurers  of  alleged     
tortfeasors in accordance with the terms and limitations of the           
tortfeasor’s insurance policy. See 26 P.R. Laws Ann. §§ 2001, 2003;       
García-Navarro v. Hogar La Bella Unión, Inc., Civil No. 17-01271          
(JAW) 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 224117, at *44 (D.P.R. Nov. 30, 2020).        
Specifically, in the relevant part, the Insurance Code states:            
    Any individual sustaining damages and losses shall have,             
    at his option, a direct-action against the insurer under             
    the terms and limitations of the policy, which action he             
    may exercise against the insurer only or against the                 
    insurer  and  the  insured  jointly.  The  direct-action             
    against the insurer may only be exercised in Puerto Rico.            
    The  liability  of  the  insurer  shall  not  exceed  that           
    provided for in the policy, and the court shall determine            
    not  only  the  liability  of  the  insurer,  but  also  the         
    amount of the loss. Any action brought under this section            
    shall  be  subject  to  the  conditions  of  the  policy  or         
    contract and to the defenses that may be pleaded by the              
    insurer to the direct-action instituted by the insured.              

26 P.R. Laws Ann. § 2003.                                                 
    This  District  Court  has  previously  stated  that  “[t]he         
language of the direct-action statute largely speaks for itself.          
As long as the suit is pursued in Puerto Rico, “any individual”           
who properly claims “damages and losses” may bring such action            
directly  against  the  insured,  the  insurer,  or  both  jointly.”     
Reifer-Mapp v. 7 Maris, Inc., 830 F.Supp 72, 75 (D.P.R. 1993).            
Moreover,  this  Court  held  that  the  statute  applies  to  marine     
insurance  policies  stressing  that  “nowhere  in  the  statutory        

section containing the direct-action remedy in Puerto Rico are            
there  exceptions   or  special   considerations  involving   any         
particular type of insurance policy or company.” Id.                      
C.   The New York Convention                                              

    The  New  York  Convention’s  treaty  governs  international         
arbitration. In September 1970, the United States acceded to the          
treaty and the Convention entered into force soon thereafter. See         
New York Convention Act § 4; 21 U.S.T. 2517. The purpose of the           
New  York  Convention  is  to  “encourage  the  recognition   and         
enforcement of commercial arbitration agreements in international         
contracts  and  to  unify  the  standards  by  which  agreements  to      
arbitrate are observed and arbitral awards are enforced in the            
signatory countries.” Scherk v. Alberto Culver Co., 417 U.S. 506,         
520 (1974).                                                               
 “An action or proceeding falling under the Convention shall be          
deemed to arise under the Constitution, laws or treatises of the          
United States.” Ledee v. Ceramiche Ragno, 528 F.Supp. 243, 245            
(D.P.R. 1981), aff'd, 684 F.2d 184 (1st Cir. 1982) (quoting 9             
U.S.C. § 203). As such, the New York Convention is “supreme law”          
and has a preemptive effect over state law. See Green Enters., LLC        
v. Dual Corp. Risks Ltd., Civil No. 20-1243 (JAG), 2021 U.S. Dist.       
LEXIS 112989, at *13 (D.P.R. June 15, 2021); Filanto S.p.A. v.            
Chilewich Intern. Corp., 789 F.Supp. 1229, 1236 (S.D.N.Y. 1992),          
aff’d, 984 F.2d 58 (2d Cir. 1993) (the New York Convention, as a          

treaty, “is the supreme law of the land, U.S. Const. Article VI           
Cl.2, and controls any case in any American court falling within          
its sphere of application.”).                                             
    Moreover,  as  held  in  Green  Enters.,  LLC,  the  New  York       
Convention, unlike the Federal Arbitration Act, is not subject to         
the reverse-preemption effect of the MFA. Green Enters., LLC, 2021        
US. Dist. LEXIS 112989, at *13. The MFA establishes that “[n]o Act        
of Congress shall be construed to invalidate, impair, or supersede        
any law enacted by any State for the purpose of regulating the            
business of insurance, or which imposes a fee or tax upon such            
business, unless such Act specifically relates to the business of         
insurance.”  15  U.S.C.  §  1012(b). In  Green  Enters,  LLC,  this       

District  concluded  that  the  New  York  Convention  preempted  the     
Puerto  Rico  Insurance  Code  since  it  was  self-executing.  Green     
Enters., LLC, U.S. Dist. LEXIS 112989 at 12-13. The Convention was        
thus not considered an “Act of Congress” like the FAA, and the MFA        
did not function to limit international arbitration. Id. As such,         
this District held that in ratifying the Convention, “the federal         
government established a uniform policy favoring enforcement of           
international arbitration agreements even when "a contrary result         
would be forthcoming in a domestic context.”” Id. at *18; see also       
Green Enters., LLC v. Hiscox Syndicates Ltd., 68 F.4th 662, 667           
(1st Cir. 2023) (quoting CLMS Mgmt. Servs. Ltd. P'ship v. Amwins          
Brokerage of Ga., LLC, 8 F.4th 1007, 1013 (9th Cir. 2021)) (stating       

that Article II(3) of the Convention “is addressed directly to            
domestic  courts,  mandates  that domestic  courts  ‘shall’  enforce      
arbitration agreements, and ‘leaves no discretion to the political        
branches of the federal government whether to make enforceable the        
agreement-enforcing rule it prescribes.’”); 21 U.S.T. 2519.               
    Article II(1) of the New York Convention provides that “[e]ach       
Contracting State shall recognize an agreement in writing under           
which the parties undertake to submit to arbitration all or any           
differences which have arisen or which may arise between them in          
respect of a defined legal relationship, whether contractual or           
not,  concerning  a  subject  matter  capable  of  settlement  by         
arbitration.” 21 U.S.T. 2519. Article II(3) goes on to state that         

“[t]he court of a Contracting State, when seized of an action in          
a matter in respect of which the parties have made an agreement           
within the meaning of this article, shall, at the request of one          
of the parties, refer the parties to arbitration, unless it finds         
that the said agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable        
of being performed.” Id. In short, if applicable, the Convention          
requires this Court to grant a motion to compel arbitration if:           
(1) the contract in dispute “falls under the convention”; and (2)         
the contract is not “null and void, inoperative or incapable of          
being performed.”                                                         
    The  First  circuit  considers  four  factors  in  determining       
whether a dispute “falls under the Convention”: (1) the existence         

of a written arbitration agreement; (2) whether it provides for           
arbitration in the territory that is a signatory to the Convention;       
(3) whether it arises out of a commercial relationship; and (4)           
whether a party to the agreement is not an American citizen, or           
whether  the  commercial  relationship  from  which  the  agreement       
arises  has  some  reasonable  relation  with  a  foreign  state.  See    
DiMercurio v. Sphere Drake Ins., PLC, 202 F.3d 71, 74 (1st Cir.           
2000); Eazy Elecs. & Tech., LLC v. LG Elecs., Inc., 226 F. Supp.          
3d 68, 73-74 (D.P.R. 2016).                                               
    Finally, in the 2020 case, GE Energy Power Conversion Fr.            
SAS, Corp. v. Outokumpu Stainless USA, LLC, 140 S. Ct. 1637 (2020),       
the  Supreme  Court  unanimously  held  that  state-law  equitable        

estoppel doctrine did not conflict with the New York Convention           
and allowed for the enforcement of an arbitration agreement by a          
non-signatory party. Critically, in his majority opinion, Justice         
Thomas noted that since the New York Convention “does not address         
whether non-signatories may enforce arbitration agreements under          
domestic doctrines such as equitable estoppel[,]” “the provisions         
of Article II contemplate the use of domestic doctrines to fill           
gaps in the Convention.” Id. at 1645. The Majority went on to             
highlight that Article II of the New York Convention “address[es]        
the recognition of arbitration agreements, not who is bound by a          
recognized agreement.” Id. at 1648.                                       
                          V. DISCUSSION                                  

A.   The applicability of the New York Convention to the P&I Policy       
    Before  examining  the  arbitrability  of  SIGCo’s  claims,  the     
Court must determine whether the P&I Policy is subject to the New         
York  Convention.  Steamship  argues  that  in  applying  the  First      
Circuit’s four factor test, there is no question that the P&I             
Policy falls under the New York Convention. The Court concurs that        
the factors necessary to trigger the New York Convention are met.         

    First, Steamship’s Certificate of Entry in conjunction with          
Steamship’s  Rules  are   sufficient  to  constitute  a   written         
arbitration agreement. See Fisser v. International Bank, 282 F.2d         
231, 232 (2d Cir. 1960) (citing 9 U.S.C.S. §§ 2,4) (“A written            
provision in any maritime transaction to settle by arbitration a          
controversy thereafter arising out of such transaction is the sine        
qua non of an enforceable arbitration agreement.”). Second, Rule          
47 of Steamship’s P&I Policy Rules for 2006-2007 designates London,       
as the location for arbitration, which falls within the territory         
of the United Kingdom, a signatory of the New York Convention. See        
Kronlage Fam. Ltd. P’ship v. Indep. Specialty Ins. Co., Civil No.         
22-1013, 2023 WL 246847 (E.D. La. Jan. 18, 2023) (noting that the         
United Kingdom and the United States are both signatories of the         
New York Convention). Third, the P&I Policy and its rules arise           
out of a commercial legal relationship. See Gulledge v. Certain           
Underwriters  at  Lloyd's,  London,  Civil  No.  18-6657,  2018  WL       

4627387, at *2 (E.D. La. Sept. 27, 2018) (“The agreement arises           
out  of   Defendant's  insurance  policy,   a  commercial   legal         
relationship. . .”). Fourth, the parties to the contract, Margara         
and  Steamship   are  both   foreign   corporations  with  their          
headquarters and primary places of business outside of the United         
States. (Docket Nos. 9 ¶¶ 31-34; 53 ¶ 3; and 86 ¶ 3). Based on the        
foregoing, the Court concurs with Steamship that the P&I Policy           
falls under the New York Convention.                                      
    Having determined that the New York Convention applies to the        
Policy, the Court must next consider whether the Policy is “null          
and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed” to determine       
if the Convention governs the present dispute. 21 U.S.T. 2519. If         

the  Court  finds  that  the  Policy  is  valid,  then  the  New  York    
Convention, as supreme law, supersedes the Puerto Rican Insurance         
Code,  particularly  the  term  requiring  that  a  direct-action  be     
exercised  in  Puerto  Rico.  In  evaluating  the  validity  of  the      
Policy’s  arbitration  agreement,  the  Court  must  analyze  the         
arbitrability of the P&I Policy as applied to SIGCo.                      
    B.   Arbitrability                                                   
    In considering Steamship’s Motion to Compel Arbitration, the         
Court finds that there is no question that the first two prongs of        
the  First  Circuit’s  arbitrability  test  are  met.  Neither  party     

disputes  that  the  P&I  Policy  between  Steamship  and  Margara        
contained  a  clear  and  valid  arbitration  term.  Moreover,  it  is    
evident that as a signatory to the P&I Policy, Steamship, the             
moving  party,  has  the  authority  to  invoke  the   contract’s         
arbitration term. See Cooper Tire & Rubber Co. v. Premium Tire &          
Parts Corp., Civil No. 17-2085 (DRD), 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 104192,       
at *10 (D.P.R. June 18, 2018) (citing Torres-Rosario v. Marriott          
Int’l, 872 F.Supp.2d 149, 153 (D.P.R. 2012) (stating that this            
prong of the First Circuit’s test is satisfied when the moving            
party is a party or signatory to the agreement possessing the             
arbitration  provision).  Controversy  between  the  Steamship  and       
SIGCo arises over the final two prongs of the First Circuit’s test:       

whether the non-moving party is bound by the arbitration agreement        
and if the claims being brought fall within the scope of that             
agreement.                                                                
    1.   SIGCo as a non-signatory party                                  
    Steamship argues that SIGCo can be bound to the P&I Policy’s         
arbitration  provision,  even  when  it  did  not  sign  the  Policy.     
(Docket No. 87 at 17). Invoking the doctrine of direct benefit            
equitable estoppel, Steamship contends that SIGCo’s direct-action         
suit relies on the exact contract that’s arbitration term SIGCo          
seeks to avoid. (Id.). As such, SIGCo should be required to adhere        
to arbitration term of the Policy. (Id.). SIGCo rebuts this claim         
arguing that as a non-signatory to the P&I Policy, it did not             

consent to the Contract’s arbitration term and thus cannot be bound       
by it under federal admiralty law, Puerto Rico law, or the New            
York Convention. (Docket No. 121 at 10-11). Thus, the Court must          
consider whether the doctrine of equitable estoppel functions to          
bind SIGCo despite its status as a non-signatory. To do so, it            
must first determine which law governs the question of whether a          
non-signatory is bound by the provisions of a contract.                   
    In GE Energy Power Conversion France SAS, Corp., the Supreme         
Court unanimously held that domestic equitable estoppel doctrines         
can apply to agreements falling under the New York Convention when        
the  Convention  is  silent  on  an  issue.  See  GE  Energy  Power       
Conversion France SAS, Corp., 140 S. Ct. at 1645 (stating that            

“Far from displacing domestic law, the provisions of Article II           
contemplate the use of domestic doctrines to fill gaps in the             
Convention.”)  The  Court  indicated  that  similar  to  its  earlier     
determination in Arthur Andersen LLP v. Carlisle, 556 U.S. 624,           
630, (2009) regarding the Federal Arbitration Act, the application        
of the Convention does not “alter background principles of state          
contract  law  regarding  the  scope  of  agreements  (including  the     
question of who is bound by them).” GE Energy Power Conversion            
France SAS, Corp., 140 S. Ct. at 1640 (citing Arthur Andersen LLP,       
556 U.S. at 630); see also Gonzalez v. UBS Fin. Servs., Inc., Civil       
No. 19-01086 (WGY), 2023 WL 3952983, at *1 (D.P.R. June 12, 2023)         
(stating  that  “arbitration  is  viewed  under  federal  law  as  a      

creature of state-law consent. . .”). In light of the Supreme             
Court’s ruling in GE Energy Power Conversion France SAS, Corp.,           
this Court finds that Puerto Rico law controls the question of            
whether SIGCo, as a non-signatory, is bound by the P&I Policy.            
    Puerto Rican law generally favors arbitration. See Quiñones–         
González, 161 D.P.R. 668; see also 32 P.R. Laws Ann. § 3201. “The         
Supreme Court of Puerto Rico has reiterated in many occasions that        
the PRCAA embodies a vigorous policy favoring arbitration and that        

all doubts about the existence of arbitration must be resolved in         
favor of that proceeding.” Garrison v. Palmas Del Mar Homeowners          
Ass'n, Inc., 538 F. Supp. 2d 468, 476 (D.P.R. 2008)(citing Medina         
Betancourt et al. v. Cruz Azul de P.R., 155 D.P.R. 735, 738, 2001         
WL  1617211)  (2001).  But  under  the  Puerto  Rico   Commercial         
Arbitration  Act  (32  P.R.  Laws  Ann.  §  3201  et  seq.),  “the        
arbitration mechanism is to be employed only if agreed by the             
parties   and   in   the   manner   agreed   upon.”   Thus,   “a          
dispute's arbitrability,  that  is,  the  finding  of  whether  an        
agreement binds the parties to arbitrate a given controversy, is          
a judicial task.” Garrison v. Palmas Del Mar Homeowners Ass’n,            
Inc., 538 F.Supp.2d 468, 476 (D.P.R. 2008) (citing Crufon Const.         
v. Autoridad Edificios Públicos, 156 D.P.R. 197, 202 (2002)). In          
ascertaining the meaning of a Contract, Section 3472 of the Puerto        
Rico Civil Code states that “attention must principally be paid to        

their acts, contemporaneous and subsequent to the contract.” P.R.         
Laws Ann, tit. 31, § 3472.                                                
    In evaluating the intent of the parties in the present               
case, this Court will look to First-Circuit precedent applying            
the doctrine of direct benefits estoppel to ascertain whether             
SIGCo intentionally embraced and benefited from the P&I Policy            
to the extent that principles of equity bind SIGCo to the                 
Policy’s arbitration term.                                                
    The First Circuit has stated that “of course, as a general           
proposition, a contract [for arbitration] cannot bind a non party.”       
Grand Wireless, Inc. v. Verizon Wireless, Inc., 748 F.3d 1, 9 (1st        
Cir. 2014). But, “[a] non-signatory may be bound by or acquire            

rights  under  an  arbitration  agreement  under  ordinary  state-law     
principles of agency or contract.” Id. at 9-10 (quoting Restoration       
Pres. Masonry, Inc. v. Grove Eur. Ltd., 325 F.3d 54, 62 n. 2 (1st         
Cir. 2003)). Nevertheless, the First Circuit advised that “courts         
should  be  extremely  cautious  about  forcing  arbitration  in          
situations in which the identity of the parties who have agreed to        
arbitrate  is  unclear.”  Cabrera-Morales  v.  UBS  Trust  Co.,  769      
F.Supp.2d 67, 71 (D.P.R. 2011) (citing InterGen N.V., 344 F.3d at        
143).                                                                     
    An arbitration clause may be enforced against a non-signatory        
party in “cases [that] involve non-signatories who, during the            

life of the contract, have embraced the contract despite their            
non-signatory  status  but  then,  during  litigation,  attempt  to       
repudiate the arbitration clause in the contract.” InterGen N.V.,         
344 F.3d at 145 (quoting E.I. DuPont de Nemours & Co. v. Rhone            
Poulenc Fiber & Resin Intermediates, S.A.S., 269 F.3d 187, 200 (3d        
Cir. 2001)); see also Am. Bureau of Shipping v. Tencara Shipyard          
S.P.A., 170 F.3d 349, 353 (2d Cir. 1999); Med. Air Tech. Corp. v.         
Marwan Inv., Inc., 303 F.3d 11, 18 (1st Cir. 2002). On this basis,        
“a  party  may  be  estopped  from  asserting  that  the  lack  of  his   
signature  on  a  written  contract  precludes  enforcement  of  the      
contract’s arbitration clause when he has consistently maintained         
that other provisions of the same contract should be enforced to          

benefit him." InterGen N.V., 344 F.3d at 145 (quoting Int’l Paper         
Co. v. Schwabedissen Maschinen & Anlagen GMBH, 206 F.3d 411, 418          
(4th Cir. 2000)).                                                         
    In Cabrera-Morales, this District Court cited instances in           
which Circuit courts suggested that a non-signatory party might be        
found to have exhibited sufficient exploitation of an agreement to        
be bound by its terms. See Cabrera-Morales, 769 F.Supp.2d at 72.          
For example, in Bridas S.A.P.I.C. v. Gov't of Turkmenistan, 345           
F.3d 347, 362 (5th Cir. 2003), the Fifth Circuit stated that when        
the non-signatory party brought suit under the agreement at issue,        
it  constituted  exploitation  for  equitable  estoppel  purposes.        
Analogously, the Fourth Circuit determined that a non-signatory           

was estopped from avoiding an agreement’s arbitration clause when         
its  “entire  case  hinge[d]  on  its  asserted  rights  under”  the      
agreement containing the arbitration clause. See Int'l Paper Co.,         
206 F.3d at 418; see also Ribadeneira v. New Balance Ath., Inc.,          
65 F.4th 1, 21 (1st Cir. 2023) (quoting MAG Portfolio Consult,            
GMBH v. Merlin Biomed Grp. LLC, 268 F.3d 58, 61 (2d Cir. 2001)            
(stating  that  a  non-signatory  may  be  bound  when  it  “knowingly    
exploit[ed] an agreement with an arbitration clause,” such as by          
“‘knowingly  accept[ing]  the  ‘direct’  benefits’  of  such   an         
agreement”). Conversely, the party should not be bound when gaining       
an  indirect  benefit  “where  the  non-signatory  exploits  the          
contractual  relation  of  parties  to  an  agreement  but  does  not     

exploit (and thereby assume) the agreement itself.” MAG Portfolio         
Consult, GMBH, 268 F.3d at 61.                                            
    Thus, when non-signatories’ causes of action are borne of a          
contract  containing  an  arbitration  term,  courts  have  concluded     
that those parties which have actively exploited the contract, are        
thus also bound by all its terms. Most recently, the First Circuit        
concluded that direct benefits estoppel applied to prevent a non-         
signatory  owner  of  a  sporting  goods  company  from  avoiding  a      
contract’s arbitration term. See Ribadeneira, 65 F.4th 1. There,         
the owner, who had been assigned legal rights to a claim by the           
company, sought injunction against the shoemakers based on the            
argument that a distribution agreement between the shoemaker and          

the sporting goods company was enforceable and that the shoemaker         
had violated its terms. Id. at 8. When the shoemaker subsequently         
sought to initiate arbitration proceedings against the owner, the         
owner argued that since he was only an assignee to the agreement’s        
legal claims and not a signatory to the distribution contract, he         
could not be bound by its arbitration term. Id. at 9. The First           
Circuit  disagreed  stating  that  “Ribadeneira  sought  to  legally      
enforce. . .a claim under that contract. Because he sought to             
enforce the terms of the New Agreement, thereby knowingly receiving       
a direct benefit from that contract, we conclude that Ribadeneira         
was estopped from avoiding that putative contract's arbitration           
clause, despite his non-signatory status.” Id. at 26-27.                  

    Analogous  to  Ribadeneira,  courts  have  bound  non-signatory      
parties to an arbitration term in cases where said parties legally        
invoked the contract. See e.g. Hughes Masonry Co. v. Greater Clark        
County School Bldg. Corp, 659 F.2d 836, 838-39 (7th Cir. 1981)            
(finding  a  non-signatory  party  to  be  bound  by  an  arbitration     
agreement after that same party invoked the agreement to show that        
a signatory party failed to perform its contractual duties); Int’l        
Paper Co., 206 F.3d at 411 (binding a non-signatory party under an        
arbitration term of a contract that said party used to bring claims      
that a signatory party failed to honor warranties contained in the        
contract).                                                                
    Conversely, when non-signatories’ disputes arise independent         

of a contract containing an arbitration term, courts have refused         
to  bind  those  parties  to  the  terms  of  the  contract.  See  e.g.   
InterGen N.V., 344 F.3d at 140 (finding that a non-signatory party        
did  not  benefit  from  a  contract  when  their  claims  against  a     
signatory party “neither sought to recover for breach of contract         
nor  to  enforce  any  contractual  right.”);  Cabrera-Morales,  769      
F.Supp. 2d at 71 (finding that a non-signatory trust beneficiary          
plaintiff suing trustees for breach of fiduciary duty and duty of         
loyalty was not bound by an arbitration clause in the agreement           
between the trustees and their financial advisor).                        
    Applying the direct benefits theory of equitable estoppel,           
this Court finds that Steamship has met the burden of demonstrating       

that SIGCo exploited the P&I Contract in a manner that merits             
recharacterizing it as a party that can be bound to the arbitration       
term of the Policy. SIGCo’s cause of action against Steamship is          
rooted in and dependent upon the P&I Policy. SIGCo is not bringing        
suit against Steamship on non-contractual grounds but is relying          
on  the  terms  of  the  Policy  to  provide  it  with  financial         
compensation should the United States be awarded damages against          
SIGCo under OPA. As such, the Court concludes that SIGCo seeks to         
derive both a legal cause of action and potential future financial       
benefits  from  the  terms  of  the  P&I  Policy  and  should  thus  be   
estopped from avoiding the other provisions in the Policy that it         
finds less advantageous.                                                  

    2.   The Scope of the P&I Policy’s arbitration clause                
    Having determined that SIGCo can be bound to the arbitration         
term in the P&I Policy, the Court considers whether all of SIGCo’s        
claims  are  captured  by  the  P&I  Policy’s  arbitration  term.  In     
SIGCo’s  complaints  against  Steamship,  it  seeks  to  subrogate        
Margara’s insurance claims against Steamship arising from the P&I         
Policy and be guaranteed contributions to any damages it must pay         
to the United States arising from the Margara’s grounding. The            

arbitration term contained in Rule 47 of the P&I Policy Rules for         
2006-2007 provides                                                        
    In the event of any difference or dispute whatsoever,                
    between or affecting a Member and the Club and concerning            
    the insurance afforded by the Club under these rules or              
    any amounts due from the Club to the Member or the Member            
    to the Club, such difference or dispute shall in the                 
    first  instance  be  referred  to  adjudication  by  the             
    Directors  .  .  .  If  the  Member  does  not  accept  the          
    decision of the Directors, or if the Managers, in their              
    absolute  discretion,  so  decide,  the  difference  or              
    dispute shall be referred to the arbitration of three                
    arbitrators, one to be appointed by each of the parties              
    and  the  third  by  the  two  arbitrators  so  chosen,  in          
    London. As this Court previously noted, Puerto Rican law             
    governs  the  determination  of  the  contents  of   an              
    arbitration agreement.                                               
(Docket No. 87-3 at 82). (emphasis supplied). Steamship argues            
that the language of Rule 47 covering “any difference or dispute”         
is sufficiently broad to encompass all SIGCo’s claims. (Docket No.       
87  at  14-15).  SIGCo  disagrees,  finding  that  its  direct-action     
claims are not differences or disputes between “a Member and the          
Club.” (Docket 121 at 25).                                                

    As noted, the determination of the arbitrability and scope of        
an arbitration contract are matters of state law. The Puerto Rico         
Supreme Court has held that “it is incumbent upon the court to            
examine the parties' intention to determine which controversies           
they had agreed to submit to arbitration. . .” Crufon Const. v.           
Aut.  Edif.  Pubs.,  156  D.P.R.  197,  ---  P.R.  Offic.  Trans.  ---    
(2002). Under Puerto Rico contract law, courts look to the plain          
language of a contract to ascertain its intended scope. 31 P.R.           
Laws § 3471 (“If the terms of a contract are clear and leave no           
doubt as to the intentions of the contracting parties, the literal        
sense  of  its  stipulations  shall  be  observed.”);  see   also         
Littlefield v. Acadia Ins. Co., 392 F.3d 1 (1st Cir. 2004) (citing        

2 Lee R. Russ, Couch on Insurance § 22:43 (3d ed. 1995)) (“Since          
it must be assumed that each word contained in an insurance policy        
is intended to serve a purpose, every term will be given effect if        
that can be done by any reasonable construction.”).                       
    The Court finds that the plain language of the clause covers         
“any  difference  or  dispute  whatsoever,  between  or  affecting  a     
Member and the Club and concerning the insurance afforded by the          
Club.” (Docket No. 87-3 at 82). Considering that SIGCo’s causes of        
action  against  Steamship  arise  from  the  insurance  agreement       
between Steamship’s members, Margara and EJ, and Steamship itself,        
the Court finds SIGCo’s contention that its claims are outside the        
scope of the arbitration term unconvincing. Clearly, any dispute          

between  SIGCo  and  Steamship  regarding  the  distribution  of          
Steamship’s insurance compensation or coverage obligations can be         
considered as “affecting” Steamship and one or more of its members.       
Based  on  the  plain  language  of  the  Policy  and  Puerto  Rico       
principles of contract law, the Court finds that all SIGCo’s claims       
fall within the scope of the Policy’s arbitration provision.              
    Having concluded that the arbitration clause in the Policy is        
arbitrable  and  validly  enforceable  against  SIGCo,  the  Court        
concludes that the New York Convention controls this case. See            
Green Enters., LLC, 2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 112989, at *13; Ledee,          
528 F.Supp. at 245. Although 26 P.R. Laws Ann. § 2003 establishes         
that “[t]he direct-action against the insurer may only be exercised       

in Puerto Rico,” the New York Convention requires the enforcement         
of International Arbitration Agreements by their terms. The P&I           
Policy states that any “difference or dispute shall be referred to        
the arbitration. . .in London.” Thus, the Court concludes that            
SIGCo must adhere to all the Policy’s terms pursuant to the New           
York Convention and is compelled to arbitrate the case in London.         
In concurrence with this determination, the Court also finds it           
appropriate to stay the present action pending arbitration between       
SIGCo and Steamship under the Policy.                                     

                        VI.    CONCLUSION                                
    For the reasons stated above, Steamship’s Motion to Compel           
Arbitration and Motion to Stay (Docket No. 87) is GRANTED and             
SIGCo’s Motion for Oral Argument (Docket No. 132) is rendered moot.       
The Court thus stays SIGCo’s third-party claims against Steamship         
pending arbitration.                                                      

    IT IS SO ORDERED.                                                    
    In San Juan, Puerto Rico, September 26, 2023.                        

                                  s/Gina R. Méndez-Miró                  
                                  GINA R. MÉNDEZ-MIRÓ                    
                                  UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

---

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                        
                FOR THE DISTRICT OF PUERTO RICO                          


    United States of America,                                            
            Plaintiff                                                    
               v.                                                        
   Ernst Jacob and Shipowners                                            
 Insurance and Guaranty Company                                          
              Ltd.,                                                      
           Defendants.                                                   
Shipowners Insurance and Guaranty                                        
         Company, Ltd.,                                                  
      Third-Party Plaintiff                                              
               v.                                                        
 Margara Shipping Company, Ltd.                                          
and Steamship Mutual Underwriting                                        
       Association, Ltd.,                                                
     Third-Party Defendants.      Civil No. 21-1594(GMM)                 
          Ernst Jacob,                                                   
      Third-Party Plaintiff                                              
               v.                                                        
  Steamship Mutual Underwriting                                          
       Association, Ltd.,                                                
     Third-Party Defendant.                                              
    Department of Natural and                                            
 Environmental Resources of the                                          
  Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,                                           
      Plaintiff-Intervenor                                               
               v.                                                        
   Ernst Jacob and Shipowners                                            
 Insurance and Guaranty Company                                          
              Ltd.,                                                      
           Defendants.                                                   

                          OPINION AND ORDER                              
    Before the Court is Plaintiff’s Motion for Partial Summary           
Judgment  (Docket  No.  69)  and  Defendant’s  corresponding  Joint       
Motion to Deny Premature Summary Judgement Motion (Docket No. 100).       
For the reasons stated below, the Plaintiff’s Motion for Partial          
Summary Judgment is GRANTED, and the Defendant’s Joint Motion to          
Deny Premature Summary Judgement Motion is DENIED.                        
         I.   RELEVANT FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND                 
A.    Relevant Factual Background                                         
    The parties do not dispute the facts that on April 27, 2006          
at or around 12:30 a.m., a 748-foot double-hulled, ice strengthened       
tanker carrying over 300,000 barrels of No. 6 fuel oil — the T/V          
Margara — grounded in navigable waters in an area containing coral        
reefs off the coast of Tallaboa, Puerto Rico. (Docket Nos. 9 ¶¶           
35-37; 42 ¶¶ 1,38; and 39 ¶ 1).                                           
    The ship’s Master subsequently activated its Vessel Response         
Plan and the U.S. Coast Guard’s Sector San Juan was notified of           
the incident. (Docket Nos. 9 ¶¶ 39-41; 42 ¶¶ 39-40). The Coast            
Guard instructed the T/V Margara to cease all efforts to dislodge         
the vessel from the reef and dispatched its personnel and equipment       

to  the  grounding  site.  (Id.)  The  Coast  Guard  subsequently         
established a unified command post from which they could assess           
the grounding, develop recovery plans, and supervise the response         
efforts. (Id.)                                                            
    After reviewing the situation, the Coast Guard’s Federal On-         
Scene Coordinator (“FOSC”) determined that the T/V Margara posed          
a substantial threat of discharging its oil into the surrounding          
navigable waters.                                                         
    At 6:00 a.m. on April 27, 2006, the U.S. Coast Guard served          
the Master of the T/V Margara with a “Notice of Federal Interest          
For  An  Oil  Spill  Incident,”  form  letter  signed  by  the  FOSC      
declaring that an oil pollution incident “occurred or threatens to        
occur.” (Docket Nos. 9 ¶ 48; 69-4 at 52.)                                 
B.    Relevant Procedural History                                         
    On December 9, 2021, Plaintiff, the United States of America         
(“the government”), filed a complaint against Ernst Jacob (“EJ”)          
and  Shipowners  Insurance  and  Guaranty  Company  Ltd.  (“SIGCo”)       
seeking  reimbursement  and  recovery  of  natural  resource  damages     
arising from the “significant threat” of an oil discharge emanating       
from the T/V Margara into navigable U.S. waters under Section 1002        
of the Oil Pollution Act (“OPA”), 33 U.S.C. § 2702.                       
    The government asked the Court to: (1) enter a declaratory           
judgement for the Plaintiff pursuant to Section 1017(f)(2) of the         

OPA for all uncompensated damages to natural resources arising out        
of the grounding of the T/V Margara including assessment costs and        
loss, loss of use, or injury to said natural resources; (2) enter         
a judgment against the Defendants for compensation paid by the            
Fund to Trustees for natural resource damages arising from the T/V        
Margara incident as well as all costs incurred by the Fund due to         
those claims including interest, attorney’s fees, adjudicative,           
and administrative costs; (3) enter a judgement for the Plaintiff,        
on behalf of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration          
(“NOAA”),  for  all  natural  resource  damages  assessed  in  the        
Trustee’s Final Compensatory Restoration Plan and NOAA’s incurred         
and uncompensated assessment costs; and (4) award any additional          
relief as the Court deems appropriate. (Docket No. 9 at 18).              
    On September 20, 2022, the parties held a Rule 26(f) case            
management conference to set out a plan for discovery and other           
pre-trial procedural matters. In accordance with this meeting, the        
parties submitted a Notice of a proposal for a Joint Scheduling           
Plan on October 4, 2022. (Docket No. 67). Notably, in this filing,        
the parties disagreed over the necessity of further fact discovery        
regarding the OPA liability determination.                                
    In the October 4 Notice, Plaintiffs included their intention         
to file a Motion for Partial Summary Judgment on the matter of            
liability  under  the  OPA,  arguing  that  the  “factual  record  was    
already  thoroughly  developed”  and  that  the  “sole  remaining         

liability question [was] a matter committed to the discretion of          
the Coast Guard’s On Scene Coordinator.” (Docket No. 67 at 2). On         
October  7,  2022,  the  Plaintiffs  filed  the  anticipated  partial     
summary judgment motion requesting that the Court rule for them on        
the matter of whether the T/V Margara’s grounding constituted a           
“substantial threat” of an oil discharge into navigable waters,           
thus establishing that Defendants were liable pursuant to OPA.            
(Docket No. 69).                                                          
    On December 12, 2022, Defendants filed a Joint Motion to Deny        
Premature  Summary  Judgement  Motion  contending  that  Plaintiff’s      
summary judgement motion was premature given that there were open         
questions of fact regarding whether the T/V Margara’s grounding           
posed a “substantial threat” of an oil discharge. (Docket No. 100).       
                     II.  STANDARD OF REVIEW                             
A.    The “Substantial Threat” Determination                              

    OPA  provides  for  the  recovery  of  “damages  for  injury  to,    
destruction of, loss of, or loss of use of, natural resources,            
including the reasonable costs of assessing the damage, which shall       
be recoverable by a United States trustee, a State trustee, an            
Indian  tribe  trustee,  or  a  foreign  trustee.”  33  U.S.C.  §         
2702(b)(2)(A)  (Supp.  1997).  OPA  defines  natural  resources  as       
“include[ing]  land,  fish,  wildlife,  biota,  air,  water,  ground      
water, drinking water supplies, and other such resources belonging        
to, managed by, held in trust by, appertaining to, or otherwise           
controlled by the United States (including the resources of the           
exclusive economic zone), any State or local government or Indian         
tribe, or any foreign government.” 33 USC § 2701(20).                     
    Section 1006(b) of OPA requires the President of the United          
States  to  designate  federal  officials  who  shall  serve  as          
representatives on behalf of the public as trustees of the natural        
resources protected by OPA. 33 U.S.C. § 2706(b)(2). In carrying           
out this duty, the President designated the Secretary of Commerce         
as trustee for marine resources and related habitats. See 40 C.F.R.       
§ 300.600(b)(1) (1997). NOAA, a scientific and regulatory agency          
within the United States Department of Commerce, was delegated the        
responsibility of administering OPA. 40 C.F.R. § 300.600.                 
    OPA established the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund (“OSLTF”)         
which  created  an  emergency  fund  to  facilitate  the  expeditious     
removal and remediation of uncompensated damages arising from an          
OPA  incident   for  up   to  $1   billion  per   incident.   See         
33 U.S.C. § 2752; see also U.S. COAST GUARD, NPFCPUB 16465.2, OIL         
SPILL LIABILITY TRUST FUNDING FOR OIL SPILLS 7 (2006). Section            
7(c)(2)  of  Executive  Order  12777  clearly  delegated  the  United     
States Coast Guard the responsibility of administering the OSLTF.         
See Ex. Ord. No. 12777, Oct. 18, 1991, 56 C.F.R. § 54767 (stating         
that “[t]he functions vested in the President by Section 1013(e)          
of OPA, respecting the promulgation and amendment of regulations          

for  the   presentation,  filing,  processing,  settlement,  and          
adjudication  of  claims  under  OPA  against  the  Trust  Fund,  are     
delegated to the Secretary of the Department in which the Coast           
Guard is operating. . .”). The Coast Guard in turn designated the         
National  Pollution  Funds  Center  (“NPFC”),  the independent  unit      
reporting  to  the   Coast  Guard  Chief   of  Staff,  with   the         
responsibility for carrying out the OSLTF. See 33 C.F.R. Part 136.        
Thus, when a suspected OPA incident occurs, a predesignated Coast         
Guard FOSC is the administrative official tasked with determining         
whether a potential “incident”1 discharges or poses a “substantial        
threat” of discharging oil into navigable waters, triggering OPA          
jurisdiction.  See  33  U.S.C.  2714(a),  40  C.F.R.  §§  300.120,        
300.130(c).                                                               
    FOSC’s  responsibilities  are  further  described  in  federal       
rules  and  regulations  stating  that  it  is  the  role  of  the        
Coordinator to “(d) ensure the effective and immediate removal of         
a discharge and mitigation or prevention of a substantial threat          
of a discharge” by determining —. . .(2) “the discharge results in        
a substantial threat to the public health or welfare of the United        
States (including, but not limited to fish, shellfish, wildlife,          
other natural resources, and the public and private beaches and           
shorelines of the United States”; and, if it is, directing all            
Federal, State, and private actions to remove the discharge or to         
mitigate  or  prevent  the  threatened  discharge.”  40  C.F.R.  part     

300.305(d).                                                               
    As  such,  it  seems  clear  that  the  authority  to  make  a       
“substantial  threat”  determination  was  clearly delegated  to  an      
agent of the United States, namely, a predesignated Coast Guard           
FOSC. Thus, this Court will review the challenged “substantial            



1 OPA defines an “incident” as “any occurrence or series of occurrences having 
the same origin, involving one or more vessels, facilities, or any        
combination thereof, resulting in the discharge or substantial threat of  
discharge of oil.” 33 U.S.C. § 2701(14).                                  
threat”  determination  as  an  agency  action  for  the  purpose  of     
deciding whether summary judgment on the matter is appropriate.           
B.    Arbitrary and Capricious and De Novo Review Standards Under         
     APA Analysis of Informal Agency Actions                             

    In making a “substantial threat” determination in response to        
an alleged OPA incident, the Coast Guard deploys its predesignated        
FOSCs to assess, direct, and coordinate incident response efforts.        
See 40 C.F.R. part 300.305(d). These FOSCs are instructed to follow       
the Department of Commerce’s implementing regulations in carrying         
out the Natural Resource Damage Assessment program (“NRDA”). See          
15 C.F.R. 990 et seq. (1997). Under the NOAA rule, administering          
parties must first undergo a pre-assessment of responding to an           
incident in which they are tasked with determining if they possess        
jurisdiction to pursue restoration under OPA. See 15 C.F.R. 990.40.       
Three conditions must be fulfilled for trustees to determine that         
they possess OPA jurisdiction:                                            
     (1)   an incident, as defined in the regulations, must              
           have taken place;                                             

     (2)   the incident must not have been the result of a               
           permitted discharge, the discharge from a public              
           vessel;  or  a  discharge  from  any   on-shore               
           facility  covered  by  the  Trans-Alaska  Pipeline            
           Authorization Act; and                                        

     (3)   that natural resources as defined by the act “may             
           have been, or may be, injured as a result of the              
           incident.                                                     

15 C.F.R. 990.41(a)(1)-(3). (Emphasis added).                             
    The  Coast  Guard’s  Vessel  Response  Plan  regulations  define     
“substantial threat of such a discharge” as “any incident involving       
a vessel that may create a significant risk of discharge of cargo         
oil,” including groundings. 33 C.F.R. § 155.1020. But in making           
the determination, FOSCs are instructed to undergo case-by-case           
fact intensive inquiry into whether a substantial threat exists.          
See NPFC Instruction M.7300. 1, Technical Operating Procedures for        
Determining Removal Costs Under the Oil Pollution Act of 1990.            
    To determine whether an incident poses a substantial threat          
of an oil discharge that might injure relevant natural resources,         
trustees  including  the  FOSCs  are  asked  to  consider  factors        
including:                                                                
    (1) The natural resources and services of concern; (2)               
    The  procedures  available  to  evaluate  and  quantify              
    injury, and associated time and cost requirements; (3)               
    The evidence indicating exposure; (4) The pathway from               
    the incident to the natural resource and/or service of               
    concern;  (5)  The  adverse  change  or  impairment  that            
    constitutes injury; (6) The evidence indicating injury;              
    (7)  The  mechanism  by  which  injury  occurred;  (8)  The          
    potential degree, and spatial and temporal extent of the             
    injury; (9) The potential natural recovery period; and               
    (10)   The  kinds   of  primary   and/or   compensatory              
    restoration actions that are feasible.                               

15  C.F.R.  990.51(e)(1-10).  The  NPFC  operating  manual  further       
instructs FOSCs to consider whether the “situation presents an            
unacceptable probability that a discharge will occur without FOSC         
intervention,”  the  potential  for  damage  to   environmentally         
sensitive or populous areas, and whether “action must be taken            
quickly  to  prevent  a  spill.”  NATIONAL  POLLUTION  FUNDS  CENTER      
(NPFC) Technical  Operating  Procedures  for  Determining  Removal        
Costs under The Oil Pollution Act of 1990, Chpt. 7, 3-76 (1999).          
C.    The Standard of Review for The Coast Guard FOSC’s Action            

    In Plaintiffs Motion for Partial Summary Judgment (Docket No.        
69), the government posits that pursuant to the Administrative            
Procedure Act (“APA”), 5 U.S.C. §§ 551-559, the Court should apply        
the traditional agency law standard of “arbitrary and capricious          
review”  to  its  analysis  of  the  FOSC’s  “substantial  threat”        
determination. Defendants in their counter Motion for Denial of           
Partial Summary Judgment disagree. They argue that agency actions         
only merit the more deferential arbitrary and capricious review           
when the court has been provided with the “whole” administrative          
record upon which it can apply the APA standard. (Docket No. 100).        
Defendants maintain that the government has failed to provide the         
Court with the full record and thus the FOSC’s “substantial threat”       
determination should be reviewed de novo. They further contend            
that additional discovery on the “substantial threat” decision,           
upon which OPA liability turns, is essential for them to mount a          
sufficient defense on the matter that would allow the Court to            
undergo proper de novo review. The Court will first summarize the         
different  proposed  standards  of  review  and  then  proceed  to        
determine  which   standard  is   appropriate  in   the   present         
circumstances.                                                            
    Pursuant to section 706 of the APA, judicial review of an            
informal agency action considers whether the agency’s decision was        
“arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not          
in accordance with law.” 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A)(2012). The arbitrary        
and  capricious  standard  of  review  is  deferential  to  agency        
expertise and only disturbs an agency’s determination when the            
agency considered impermissible information in making its decision        
or alternatively failed to consider an important factor in making         
that same determination. See Dep’t of Homeland Sec. v. Regents of         
the Univ. of Cal., 140 S. Ct. 1891, 1896 (2020) (stating that             
“[u]nder  this  narrow  standard  of  review,  a  court  is  not  to      
substitute its judgment for that of the agency, but instead to            
assess only whether the decision was based on a consideration of          
the relevant factors and whether there has been a clear error of          
judgment.”); see also Housatonic River Initiative v. United States        

EPA, 75 F.4th 248, 270 (quoting City of Taunton, Massachusetts v.         
United States Environmental Protection Agency, 895 F.3d 120, 126          
(1st Cir. 2018) (emphasizing that “the ‘scientific and technical          
nature of …[the agency’s] decision making increases our level of          
deference.”))  Thus,  in  determining  whether  a  decision   was         
arbitrary and capricious, the APA focuses on deciding whether the         
agency action was based on “unwarranted facts” or was otherwise           
“unsupported by substantial evidence.” See 5 U.S.C. § 706 (2012)          
(listing  standards  for  holding  agency  action,  findings,  and        
conclusions unlawful).                                                    
    In evaluating whether an agency acted in an arbitrary and            
capricious manner, the court must “review the whole record or those       
parts of it cited by a party.” 5 U.S.C. § 706. The Supreme Court          
in the landmark case Citizens to Pres. Overton Park, Inc. v. Volpe        
understood the “whole” record as the “full administrative record”         
that was before the agency at the time that the decision was made.        
Overton Park, 401 U.S. 402, 420 (1971)(abrogated on other grounds         
by Califano v. Sanders, 430 U.S. 99(1977)). The administrative            
record  thus,  does  not  extend  to  litigation  materials  prepared     
afterward for judicial review. Id. at 419-20.                             
    In cases where the Court lacks a sufficient administrative           
record to review an agency’s decision under section 706 of APA,           
then the court then applies de novo review to the agency’s action.        

However, the application of de novo review to agency actions is           
exceedingly rare and “[c]ourts require a strong showing of bad            
faith or improper behavior before ordering the supplementation of         
the administrative record.” Instituto De Educacion Universal, Inc.        
v. United States Dep’t of Educ., 341 F. Supp. 2d 74, 76 (D.P.R.           
2004) (quoting Town of Norfolk v. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,           
968 F.2d 1438, 1458-59 (1st Cir. 1992); see also Charlton Memorial        
Hosp. v. Sullivan, 816 F. Supp. 50, 52 (D. Mass 1993) (stating            
that even in exceptional circumstances when statutes call for de          
novo trial review of particular facts “it may be doubted that a           
district  court  is  called  upon  to  make  ‘findings’  in  a  sense     
relevant to invoking Rule 56 (the rule governing the grant or             
denial of motions for summary judgement).”)                               
    Only in very rare cases is a court compelled to review an            
agency  decision  de  novo  due  to  an  insufficient  administrative     
record. When such cases arise, the Court undertakes its own factual       
review of the circumstances of a particular agency decision to            
determine whether the agency’s conclusion was the correct one,            
rather  than  merely  determining  if  the  agency’s  conclusion  was     
rationally based in accordance with the relevant facts. See Orndorf       
v. Paul Revere Life Ins. Co., 404 F.3d 510, 518 (1st Cir. 2005)           
(noting that de novo agency action review tasks the court with            
analyzing  “whether,  upon  a  full  review  of  the  administrative      
record, the decision of the administrator was correct.”)                  

    As such, judicial review of informal agency actions centers          
around the question of whether an agency’s conclusion was supported       
by the administrative record. See Overton, 401 U.S. at 416 (stating       
that  in  making  such  a  determination,  “the  court  must  consider    
whether the decision was based on a consideration of the relevant         
factors and whether there has been a clear error of judgment.”).          
                         III.  DISCUSSION                                
A.    Sufficiency of the Record Submitted                                 
    In their Joint Motion to Deny Premature Summary Judgement            
Motion, Defendants posit that the government failed to provide the        
Court  with  a  full  certified  administrative  record  of  the          
“substantial threat” determination. (Docket No. 100 at 2). They           
further argued that no copy of the “substantial threat” decision          
was given to the Court. (Id.) Without such a record, Defendants           
advance, the Court cannot properly review the FOSC’s “substantial         
threat”  determination  under  the  APA’s  arbitrary  and  capricious     
standard of review. In light of this, Defendants request that the         
Court apply the more stringent de novo review and allow the parties       
time to undergo discovery so that defendants can collect evidence         
to  effectively  respond  in  opposition  to  Plaintiff’s  summary        
judgment motion pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(d).2       

In  sum,  Defendant’s  motion  to  deny  the  government’s  summary       
judgment motion as premature turns on whether the administrative          
record provided to the Court was sufficient to constitute a “whole        
record” under the APA.                                                    
    Defendants highlight that under U.S. Coast Guard policies, a         
FOSC  is  required  to  document  his  or  her  “substantial  threat”     


2 See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(d) allowing a court to deny a motion for summary 
judgement  “[i]f  a  nonmovant  shows  by  affidavit  or  declaration  that,  for 
specified reasons, it cannot present facts essential to justify its opposition.” 
determination with an explanation of the reasons that he or she           
reached their conclusion. (Docket No. 103-3 at 17). Defendants            
contend  that  such  a  document  was  not  shared  as  part  of  the     
administrative record. (Docket No. 100 at 8). Defendants also argue       
that other important documents were missing from the Plaintiff’s          
provided evidentiary report, including records of trainings taken         
by the FOSC that qualified him to assess the incident and data            
produced by the reported depth soundings of the T/V Margara. (Id.         
at 10)                                                                    
    The Court acknowledges that the government could have been           
clearer in its record keeping and that the Coast Guard failed to          
include the final FOSC “substantial threat” determination in the          
exhibits that it has submitted to this Court. However, considering        
the  Supreme  Court’s  interpretation  of  “whole  [administrative]       
record” in Overton, the pages upon pages of contemporaneous Coast         

Guard reports submitted in the government’s Motion for Partial            
Summary  Judgement,  and  the  generally  deferential  review  of         
informal expert agency decisions under the APA, the Court declines        
to find that this case constitutes one of the exceedingly rare            
circumstances in which it should undergo de novo review of the            
FOSC’s administrative decision.                                           
    Arbitrary and capricious review of agency actions requires           
the reviewing court to consider either “the whole record or those         
parts of it cited by a party.” 5 U.S.C. § 706. In Overton, the            
Supreme Court established that arbitrary and capricious judicial          
review  should  interpret  “whole  [administrative]  record”  as  the     
factual information that the agency had before it at the time that        
it made the challenged decision. Thus, in determining whether the         
FOSC in this case was justified in finding that the T/V Margara’s         
grounding posed a “substantial threat” of oil discharge, the Court        
considers the information at the FOSC’s disposal at the time of           
the  incident.   Specifically,  the   relevant  information  for          
determining  the  sufficiency  of  the  administrative  record  is        
limited to that at the FOSC’s disposal between 12:30/33 am on April       
27, 2006 when the T/V Margara grounded off the coast of Tallaboa,         
Puerto Rico and 6:00 am on the same date when the Coast Guard             
presented the vessel’s master a “Notice of Federal Interest For An        
Oil Spill Incident.” (Docket No. 9).                                      
    It  should  initially  be  addressed  that  the  presence  of  a     

“substantial threat” of an oil discharge under OPA should not be          
evaluated based on the actual leakage of petroleum products into          
navigable waters. The fact that no oil spill resulted from the T/V        
Margara’s grounding is irrelevant to our inquiry here. The Court          
is tasked with determining, whether based on the information before       
him and considering the volume of the T/V Margara’s oil stores and        
the size and or character of the threat that a potential spill            
posed to the welfare of the United States, including its natural          
resources,   that   “substantial   threat”   finding,   and   the         
corresponding responsive measures were justified.                         
    Exhibits  attached  to  the  government’s  Motion  for  Partial      
Summary Judgment composing the “whole record” before the FOSC at          
the time he made his “substantial threat” determination included,         
among other things, Pollution Reports, Notification of FPN, Sector        
San Juan Incident Report, case report communication logs, a Notice        
of Federal Interest for an Oil Pollution Incident, and a Resources        
at Risk memo made at or near the time of the FOSC’s decision.             
(Docket No. 69-4); see also (Docket No. 69-5). These documents            
recorded the first responders’ analyses of the incident made during       
the  critical  5.5  hours  preceding  the  “substantial   threat”         
determination. The reports included details on factors that FOSCs         
are  required  to  consider  in  making  their  “substantial  threat”     
determinations.  E.g.  “[t]he  natural  resources  and  services  of      

concern; the mechanism by which the injury occurred; procedures           
available  to  evaluate  and  quantify  injury;  evidence  indicating     
exposure; and pathways from the incident to the natural resource          
and/or services of concern; the potential degree, and spatial and         
temporal extent of the injury.”                                           
    For instance, the Pollution Reports note that the T/V Margara,       
a vessel unmanned by a pilot and carrying over 300,000 barrels of         
# 6 oil, grounded AT POSN. 17° 57'N BY 066° 43.6'W. (Docket No. 9,        
69-4 at 38).  The report included the results of immediate incident       
assessments indicating that evaluators had not identified any loss        
of oil from the T/V Margara nor had they found significant damage         
to the craft’s hull. (Id.). The reports also noted that the vessel        
was “located in extremely environmentally sensitive south coast”          
in  an  area  containing  coral  reefs.  (Id.  at  0011098-0011100).      
Moreover, the reports considered the present and predicted weather        
conditions and noted that the vessel was “slightly moving from            
port to starboard.” (Id.).                                                
    The  Resources  at  Risk  memo  made  within  2  hours  of  the      
“substantial  threat”  determination  was  particularly  clear  in        
describing the relevant facts that the FOSC likely considered in          
making  his  OPA jurisdictional  conclusion.  This memo  emphasized       
that Oil No. 6, the type of oil carried by the T/V Margara, was a         
heavy oil “[c]apable of forming stable emulsions or tarballs that         
are extremely difficult to clean up,” possessed a tendency “to            

smother organisms that come in contact with it,” and was fairly           
persistent  with  the  ability  to  “may  have  severe  impacts  on       
waterfowl  and  diving  birds.”  (Docket  No.  69-4  at  132-135).        
Moreover, the memo noted that a discharge of oil from the T/V             
Margara  would  seriously  harm  shoreline  resources   including         
vulnerable  coastal  mangroves,  sensitive  tidal  flat  ecosystems,      
intertidal coral reefs, and a range of threatened and endangered          
species  including  Brown  pelicans,  West  Indian  Manatees,  and        
multiple species of sea turtle. (Id.). In addition to the natural         
systems damages that might arise from an oil spill from the T/V           
Margara,  the  memo  also  stressed  that  such  a  spill  would  also    
threaten  local  human-use  resources  including  local  fisheries,       
marine recreational sites, and recognized historical landmarks.           
(Id.).                                                                    
    The Court notes that the documents provided by the government,       
though   admittedly   not   comprehensive,   are   an    adequate         
representation of the information at the FOSC’s disposal when he          
made the “substantial threat” determination. Past case law aligns         
with our determination. For example, in Norfolk v. United States          
EPA, 761 F. Supp. 867, 875 (D. Mass. 1991) the District Court             
found, and the First Circuit affirmed that “[t]o the extent that          
the [Plaintiffs] argue that the administrative record must also           
contain  all  documents  on  which  [the  state  assessor]  relied  to    
create  the  documents  on  which  [federal  agency]  relied,  I  must    

disagree. [The agency] has made a good-faith effort to collect            
every  document  on  which  it  actually  relied.  .  .and  I  am  not    
prepared to ask for more.” Moreover, under the APA, an agency’s           
“designation of the Administrative Record. . .is entitled to a            
presumption of administrative regularity.” Oceana, Inc. v. Ross,          
920 F.3d 855, 865 (D.C. Cir. 2019). Defendants have failed to             
present  evidence  sufficient  to  overcome  the  presumption  of         
administrative  regularity.  Thus,  the  Court  finds  that  the          
Plaintiff’s  submitted  evidence  is  sufficient  to  constitute  a       
“whole record” subject to arbitrary and capricious review under           
the APA on the issue of OPA liability.                                    
    Arbitrary and capricious review under the APA is limited to          
the administrative record. As such, the Defendant’s invocation of         
Rule 56(d) requesting a denial of Plaintiff’s Motion for Partial          
Summary Judgement is inappropriate given that additional discovery        
on the “substantial threat” determination would not uncover any           
evidence that the Court would even consider in reviewing the FOSC’s       
agency action. Thus, the Court rejects Defendant’s argument that          
it  should  deny  the  partial  summary  judgement  of  grounds  of       
insufficient time for discovery that would allow Defendants to            
effectively oppose Plaintiff’s motion.                                    
B.    Arbitrary and Capricious Review of the FOSC’s Determination         
    The standard for making a substantial threat determination           
under OPA is that the FOSC finds a notable risk that “natural             

resources may be, injured as a result of the incident. 16 C.F.R.          
990.41(a)(3)  and  that  the  “situation  presents  an  unacceptable      
probability   that   a  discharge   will   occur   without  FOSC          
intervention,”  the  potential  for  damage  to   environmentally         
sensitive or populous areas, and whether “action must be taken            
quickly  to  prevent  a  spill.”  NATIONAL  POLLUTION  FUNDS  CENTER      
(NPFC) Technical  Operating  Procedures  for  Determining  Removal        
Costs under The Oil Pollution Act of 1990, Chpt. 7, 3-76 (1999).          
    Due to the precarious circumstances of a vessel full of large        
quantities of oil resting in an ecologically sensitive location,          
first responders including the Coast Guard proceeded with extreme         
caution by conducting repeated soundings and analyses of the craft,       
establishing  an emergency  safety  zone,  and  deploying  emergency      
tugs and booms to stabilize the craft to help mitigate discharge          
risks. (Docket No. 69-4 at 38-40); see also similar reports from          
the Sector San Juan Incident Report (Id. at 47) made at 1:25 am on        
April 27, 2006 and (Id. at 44) regarding the status of the T/V            
Margara  (noting  that  there  had  been  a  “FOSC  DETERMINATION  OF     
SUBSTANTIAL THREAT” described as a “VESSEL GOUDING IN TALLABOA,           
RP” with an estimated potential quantity of oil that could be             
discharged into navigable waters of “1000 Barrels.”).                     
    Drawing  on  the  contemporaneous  reports  and  risk  analyses      
provided to emergency responders in the early morning hours of            

April  27,  2006,  Kevin  Kirsch,  the  former  Regional  Resource        
Coordinator overseeing the response to the T/V Margara incident,          
stated  that  “based  on  all  of  the  information  noted  above,  my    
concerns included the large volume of oil which could have been           
released, the persistent nature of that type of oil, the limited          
response and clean-up resources available on the south side of            
Puerto Rico, the sensitive nature of the natural resources in the         
area, potential structural failure of the ship, and the challenging       
nature of an over-the-side shallow water fuel transfer.” (Docket          
No.  69-5  at  3).  Given  this  interpretation  of  available  data      
provided  in  the  documents  submitted  to  this  Court,  the  FOSC’s    
“substantial threat” determination does not appear to be arbitrary        
nor capricious.                                                           
                           V. CONCLUSION                                 
    For the reasons stated above, Plaintiff’s Motion for Partial         
Summary Judgement is GRANTED, and Defendant’s Joint Motion to Deny        
Premature Summary Judgement Motion is DENIED.                             
    IT IS SO ORDERED.                                                    
    In San Juan, Puerto Rico, September 7, 2023.                         

                                  s/Gina R. Méndez-Miró                  
                                  GINA R. MÉNDEZ-MIRÓ                    
                                  UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE