UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                                              
NORTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                                             

JAMEL UPSON,                                                              

                   Plaintiff,                                            

    -against-                          9:18-CV-01149 (LEK/CFH)           

GERALDINE WILSON, et al.,                                                 

                   Defendants.                                           


               MEMORANDUM-DECISION AND ORDER                             
I.   INTRODUCTION                                                         
    Plaintiff Jamel Upson commenced this action pro se on September 24, 2018. Dkt. No. 1 
(“Complaint”). The Court reviewed Plaintiff’s Complaint under 28 U.S.C. §§ 1915(e) and 1915A 
and allowed Plaintiff’s Eighth Amendment medical indifference claims to proceed. Dkt. No. 6. 
Defendants subsequently filed a motion to dismiss, Dkt. No. 22, which the Court granted in part 
and denied in part, allowing only Plaintiff’s claim against Nurses Geraldine Wilson and 
Elizabeth White to proceed, while dismissing all claims against other defendants. Dkt. No. 43. 
Following discovery, White and Wilson (“Defendants”) filed a motion for summary judgment. 
Dkt. No. 59 (“Motion” or “Motion for Summary Judgment”). Plaintiff then filed a response, Dkt. 
No. 70 (“Plaintiff’s Response”), and Defendants filed a reply in support of the Motion, Dkt. No. 
67 (“Reply”). Now before the Court is a Report-Recommendation by the Honorable Christian F. 
Hummel, United States Magistrate Judge, Dkt. No. 71 (“Report-Recommendation”), 
recommending that Defendants’ Motion be granted. Plaintiff has filed objections, Dkt. No. 77 
(“Objections”), and Defendants have responded, Dkt. No. 78 (“Defendants’ Response”). For the 
reasons that follow, the Court adopts Judge Hummel’s Report-Recommendation in its entirety. 
II.  BACKGROUND                                                           
    A.   Factual Allegations                                             
    Plaintiff’s factual allegations are detailed in the Report-Recommendation, familiarity 
with which is assumed. See R. & R. at 2–5.                                
    B.   The Report-Recommendation                                       

    On March 11, 2022, Judge Hummel comprehensively reviewed Defendants’ Motion and 
Plaintiff’s Response, finding that the Motion should be granted. See generally R. & R.  
         1.  Defendant Wilson                                            
    Judge Hummel found that the undisputed facts would not allow a reasonable jury to 
conclude Wilson acted with a sufficiently culpable state of mind to render her deliberately 
indifferent under the Eighth Amendment. Id. at 10–11. First, he reasoned, even if she was 
“dismissive and displayed a lack of empathy toward Plaintiff, the undisputed facts demonstrate 
that she conducted a complete physical examination of Upson, listened to his complaints, and 
provided him with guidance on how to proceed if his symptoms did not improve.” Id. at 10–11. 
Next, Judge Hummel found that Wilson’s failure to provide Plaintiff with pain medication, 

which he did not request, is also insufficient to demonstrate a culpable state of mind. Id. at 11–
12. Finally, Judge Hummel concluded that even if Wilson failed to review Plaintiff’s medical 
records, there is no evidence this failure was due to anything other than a lack of care. Id. at 12.  
    In addition, Judge Hummel found that any contention that Wilson caused a delay in 
treatment lacks merit because Wilson examined Plaintiff approximately one hour after his initial 
request for medical attention. Id. at 13. Judge Hummel also found that Plaintiff’s affidavit, 
provided in opposition to Plaintiff’s Motion, fails to create a dispute of fact because his claims 
therein that Plaintiff “showed [Wilson] the vomit” and made her aware of his “prior issues with 
bowel obstructions” are contradicted by his deposition testimony. Id. at 13–14.  
         2.  Defendant White                                             
    Judge Hummel found that White’s actions in response to Plaintiff’s statement that he was 
vomiting and having an emergency failed to rise to the level of deliberate indifference because 
there is no evidence “White knew of and disregarded an ‘excessive risk to his health’ . . . .” Id. at 

14 (quoting Farmer v. Brennan, 511 U.S. 825, 837 (1970)). Judge Hummel further found that 
White’s failure to adhere to DOCCS policy was insufficient to establish a constitutional 
violation, id. at 14–15, and that the eight-and-a-half-hour delay of medical treatment that resulted 
from White’s conduct was neither shown to be intentional, nor long enough to constitute 
deliberate indifference, id. at 15.                                       
         3.  Prematurity of Summary Judgment Motion                      
    Plaintiff argued in his Response that summary judgment is premature due to outstanding 
discovery. Id. at 17 (citing Resp. at 7). Plaintiff contended that Defendants had failed to disclose 
medical records and audio/video tapes, which could support his claims. R. & R. at 17. Judge 
Hummel examined this argument under Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(d), which sets out the standard for 

reopening discovery. Id. Judge Hummel ultimately concluded that Plaintiff had failed to 
demonstrate his entitlement to reopen discovery because his affidavit did not reference his 
request for medical records, Plaintiff failed to demonstrate that his medical records were 
relevant, and Plaintiff provided only conclusory statements indicating that the contents of the 
audio or video footage were necessary to oppose Defendants’ Motion. Id. at 18. Because Judge 
Hummel concluded that summary judgment was appropriate even after accepting Plaintiff’s 
version of events, he found Plaintiff’s claim that the “audio or video surveillance would assist 
him in establishing Eighth Amendment violations [to be] nothing more than speculation and 
insufficient to oppose a motion for summary judgment.” Id. at 18–19. Finally, Judge Hummel 
noted that Plaintiff had ample time to obtain discovery and never sought judicial intervention or 
requested an extension of time to conduct discovery. Id. at 19.           
    Judge Hummel noted that Defendants’ Reply failed to provide any explanation regarding 
their failure to provide medical records or audio or video tapes. Id. at 19–20. However, Judge 

Hummel concluded that this did not preclude summary judgment given that Plaintiff had failed 
to explain how such information would be relevant to his Eighth Amendment claims. Id. at 20.  
III.  STANDARD OF REVIEW                                                  

    “Rule 72 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and Title 28 United States Code Section 
636 govern the review of decisions rendered by Magistrate Judges.” A.V. by Versace, Inc. v. 
Gianni Versace, S.p.A., 191 F. Supp. 2d 404, 405 (S.D.N.Y. 2002); see also 28 U.S.C. § 636; 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 72. Review of decisions rendered by Magistrate Judges are also governed by the 
Local Rules. See L.R. 72.1. As 28 U.S.C. § 636 states:                    
         Within  fourteen  days  after  being  served  with  a  copy  [of  the 
         Magistrate Judge’s report and recommendation], any party may    
         serve and file written objections to such proposed findings and 
         recommendations as provided by rules of the court. A judge of the 
         court shall make a de novo determination of those portions of the 
         report or specified proposed findings or recommendations to which 
         objection is made. A judge of the court may accept, reject, or  
         modify, in whole or in part, the findings of recommendations made 
         by  the  magistrate  judge.  The  judge  may  also  receive  further 
         evidence  or  recommit  the  matter  to  the  magistrate  judge  with 
         instructions.                                                   

28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1). When written objections are filed and the district court conducts a de 
novo review, that “de novo determination does not require the Court to conduct a new hearing; 
rather, it mandates that the Court give fresh consideration to those issues to which specific 
objections have been made.” A.V. by Versace, 191 F. Supp. 2d at 406 (emphasis in original); see 
also 12 Wright & Miller, Fed. Prac. & Proc. Civ. § 3070.2 (3rd ed.) (2022) (“[T]he judge to 
whom the objection is made must review the record and magistrate’s recommendations, and 
must make a de novo determination of the facts and legal conclusions, receiving additional 
evidence and rehearing witnesses at his or her discretion. The district judge must not be a rubber 
stamp.” (footnote omitted)).                                              

    “The district court may adopt those portions of a report and recommendation to which no 
timely objections have been made, provided no clear error is apparent from the face of the 
record.” DiPilato v. 7-Eleven, Inc., 662 F. Supp. 2d 333, 339 (S.D.N.Y. 2009). “When a party 
makes only conclusory or general objections, or simply reiterates the original arguments, the 
Court will review the [report and recommendation] strictly for clear error.” New York City Dist. 
Couns. of Carpenters Pension Fund v. Forde, 341 F. Supp. 3d 334, 336 (S.D.N.Y. 2018) (quoting 
Molefe v. KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, 602 F. Supp. 2d 485, 487 (S.D.N.Y. 2009)). 
    “The objections of parties appearing pro se are ‘generally accorded leniency’ and should 
be construed ‘to raise the strongest arguments that they suggest.’” DiPilato, 662 F. Supp. 2d at 
340 (emphasis in original) (quoting Milano v. Astrue, No. 05-CV-6527, 2008 WL 4410131, at 

*2 (S.D.N.Y. Sept. 26, 2008)). “Nonetheless, even a pro se party’s objections to a Report and 
Recommendation must be specific and clearly aimed at particular findings in the magistrate’s 
proposal, such that no party be allowed a second bite at the apple by simply relitigating a prior 
argument.” DiPilato, 662 F. Supp. 2d at 340 (emphasis in original) (quoting Pinkney v. 
Progressive Home Health Servs., No. 06-CV-5023, 2008 WL 2811816, at *1 (S.D.N.Y. July 21, 
2008)).                                                                   
IV.  DISCUSSION                                                           
    A.   Plaintiff’s Objections                                          
    After the Report-Recommendation was issued on March 11, 2022, see R. & R., Plaintiff 
filed his Objections to the Report-Recommendation on April 25, 2022, Dkt. No. 77.1 Plaintiff 
indicates that he objects to Judge Hummel’s recommendations for several reasons. First, Plaintiff 
objects to Judge Hummel’s finding that the “facts do not support the conclusion that Wilson 

acted with culpable intent” during her allegedly deficient treatment of Plaintiff’s abdominal pain. 
Obj. at 4 (quoting R. & R. at 11). Plaintiff maintains that his “position is and has always been 
that Wilson simply did not care whether [P]laintiff had a medical condition or not. Wilson stated 
to Plaintiff that she does not believe anything is wrong with him, and although she went through 
the motions of conducting a [medical] examination, Wilson disregarded Plaintiff’s pain . . . .” 
Obj. at 5. Plaintiff further asserts, “Wilson knew of Plaintiff’s previous bowel obstruction issues, 
because Plaintiff made her aware of this, and documentation of this. Her response was that 
Plaintiff was full of shit. Wilson simply did not believe Plaintiff had a medical issue.” Id. Thus, 
this objection focuses on Judge Hummel’s conclusion that Wilson was not deliberately 

indifferent to Plaintiff’s medical needs, because Wilson administered a medical examination on 
Plaintiff, even though Wilson “displayed a lack of empathy” while conducting the medical exam. 
R. & R. at 10.                                                            
    However, Plaintiff has already made this argument concerning Wilson’s alleged 
skepticism and purportedly subpar medical treatment; as a result, Plaintiff is “simply relitigating 


1 Plaintiff requested an extension of time to file his objections on March 21, 2022, Dkt. No. 72, 
which the Court granted, Dkt. No. 73. Plaintiff requested another extension to file his objections 
on April 4, 2022, Dkt. No. 75, which the Court again granted, Dkt. No. 76. Thus, even though 
Plaintiff filed his objections after fourteen days of being served a copy of the Report-
Recommendation, Plaintiff’s objections are timely.                        
a prior argument.” DiPilato, 662 F. Supp. 2d at 340. Indeed, in Plaintiff’s Response, Dkt. No. 70 
at 56, Plaintiff similarly argued, “Wilson’s actions were dismissive and uncaring due to the fact 
that Wilson believed that [P]laintiff was faking regarding the symptoms he was experiencing.” 
Id. at 5. Plaintiff also noted in his Response that “although an examination was conducted, RN 

Wilson never believed Plaintiff was in distress and did not care whether Plaintiff was in 
distress.” Dkt. No. 77 at 6. Thus, because Plaintiff reiterates his prior argument, the Court 
reviews this portion of the Report-Recommendation for clear error and finds none.  
    Plaintiff next objects to Judge Hummel’s finding regarding Wilson’s alleged intentional 
refusal to review Plaintiff’s medical records detailing a history of bowel obstructions. Judge 
Hummel stated: “Even assuming Wilson failed to review Plaintiff’s medical records, Upson has 
failed to proffer evidence that her failure was due to anything other than a lack of care.” R. & R. 
at 12. Plaintiff appears to respond to this conclusion by stating, “Plaintiff has proffer[ed] his 
factual statement2 as evidence that Wilson’s failure was due to her personal judgment and not 
her professional medical judgment,” Obj. at 6, and adds that:             

         The fact that Wilson stated to Plaintiff that she did not believe 
         anything was wrong with him was made prior to any examination   
         being conducted, and Wilson repeatedly stated to Plaintiff that she 
         did not believe anything was wrong and he was faking, and would 
         not issue any treatment for his excruciating pain and discomfort. 
Id. Thus, Plaintiff’s objection focuses on Wilson’s alleged indifference to Plaintiff’s pain, and an 
intentional failure to review Plaintiff’s medical records. Plaintiff thus appears to argue that these 
actions were unconstitutional because they stemmed from Wilson’s personal animosity rather 

2 Plaintiff does not indicate which statement he is referring to and appears to conflate this 
argument with his argument that Wilson refused pain medication on the basis of personal 
animosity. Obj. at 6.                                                     
than professional judgment. This personal animosity—Plaintiff argues—ostensibly encouraged 
Wilson to (1) withhold pain medication from Plaintiff and (2) ignore Plaintiff’s medical records. 
    However, like Plaintiff’s previous objection, he has already made similar arguments in an 
earlier filing. See Dkt. No. 70 at 5–6. Plaintiff previously said in his Response, “Plaintiff was not 

issued any medication to offer relief of his excruciating pain to his abdominal. . . Wilson’s 
actions were dismissive and uncaring due to the fact that Wilson believed that Plaintiff was 
faking regarding the symptoms he was experiencing.” Id. Additionally, in Plaintiff’s Response, 
he made the argument that “Wilson was deliberate[ly] indifferent to Plaintiff’s medical need 
when she failed to review Plaintiff’s medical charts.” Dkt. No. 70 at 6. Thus, Plaintiff has 
already made these arguments—namely that Wilson unconstitutionally withheld pain medication 
because of personal reasons (rather than reasons based on an informed medical judgment), and 
that Wilson was deliberately indifferent for refusing to review Plaintiff’s medical charts. The 
Court thus reviews this portion of the Report-Recommendation for clear error and finds none.  
    Plaintiff next objects to Judge Hummel’s conclusion that Plaintiff provided contradictory 

evidence relating to Wilson’s awareness of Plaintiff’s abdominal symptoms. Obj. at 7. Judge 
Hummel stated, “Finally, in an attempt to create an issue of fact, Upson provides an affidavit and 
claims he ‘showed [Wilson] the vomit’ and made Wilson aware of his ‘prior issues with bowel 
obstructions.’ However, these assertions are contradicted by his deposition testimony.” R. & R. 
at 13 (internal citations omitted). In response, Plaintiff argues that Judge Hummel misunderstood 
the record; Plaintiff explains that “[I do] not attempt to create an issue of fact, during [my] 
deposition [I] testified that [I] showed Wilson/and or everyone [my] throw up, [I] also testified 
that [I] made Wilson aware of [my] history of prior bowel obstructions.” Obj. at 7. Accordingly, 
this is a specific objection to the Report-Recommendation, so the Court will review this portion 
of the Report-Recommendation de novo below.                               
    Plaintiff also objects to Judge Hummel’s finding regarding White allegedly ignoring 
Plaintiff’s abdominal pain. In particular, Plaintiff quotes Judge Hummel who concluded that, 

“Even assuming Upson communicated that he felt as though he was having an emergency and 
vomiting, the mere fact that Upson made this statement does not suffice to prove that these 
conditions actually existed.” R. & R. at 8. Plaintiff argues that “the Court cannot in its ruling 
disbelieve Plaintiff’s version of the events, or his facts as submitted as proof his claims.” Obj. at 
8. This specific objection focuses on the proper assessment of disputed facts during summary 
judgment, and so the Court will this portion of the Report-Recommendation de novo below. 
    Next, Plaintiff objects to Judge Hummel’s finding with respect to White’s knowledge of 
Plaintiff’s abdominal pain. Obj. at 9. Judge Hummel stated, “Because Upson admits that White 
did not examine him, and further, that he did not discuss his symptoms with her, Upson has 
failed to prove that White intentionally delayed his access to ‘medical care at a time when he was 

in extreme pain’ and made his medical problems known. . . .” R. & R. at 14 (citations omitted). 
Plaintiff counters by stating “Plaintiff told White he had an emergency, explaining his 
symptoms, and history of bowel obstruction.” Obj. at 9. Plaintiff appears to argue that White did 
in fact know of Plaintiff’s pain, contrary to Judge Hummel’s conclusion. Id. Thus, it appears that 
Plaintiff specifically objects to Judge Hummel’s reading of the record regarding White’s 
knowledge of Plaintiff’s abdominal pain. The Court will also review this portion of the Report-
Recommendation de novo below.                                             
     Plaintiff also objects to Defendants and Judge Hummel’s use of Plaintiff’s deposition 
testimony, arguing that such use violates Federal Rules of Civil Procedure “30(3)(1)(A)(B)(2),” 
and 30(5)(C). Obj. at 10. However, this is an argument that Plaintiff could have raised earlier in 
the action but failed to. See generally Docket. And “in this . . . [C]ircuit, it is established law that 
a district judge will not consider new arguments raised in objections to a magistrate judge’s 
report and recommendation that could have been raised before the magistrate but were not.” 

Hubbard v. Kelley, 752 F. Supp. 2d 311, 313 (W.D.N.Y. 2009); see also Piligian v. Icahn Sch. of 
Med. at Mount Sinai, 490 F. Supp. 3d 707, 716 (S.D.N.Y. 2020) (stating that new arguments and 
factual assertions cannot be properly raised for the first time in objections to an R. & R. and may 
be deemed “not objections at all”). Thus, Plaintiff has waived his argument relating to Fed. R. 
Civ. P. 30.                                                               
    Finally, Plaintiff argues that Defendants’ “summary judgment motion is premature” due 
to outstanding discovery related to audio and video tapes that allegedly support his claims. Obj at 
11. However, Plaintiff already made this argument before in his Response, see Dkt. No. 70 at 
11,3; thus, Plaintiff merely reiterates his argument from before. See id. Accordingly, the Court 
reviews this portion of the Report-Recommendation for clear error and finds none. 

    B.   De Novo Review of the Report-Recommendation                     
    In sum, the Court will review the following portions of the Report-Recommendation de 
novo: Plaintiff’s objection that Judge Hummel misunderstood the record with respect to whether 
Wilson saw Plaintiff throw up or knew of Plaintiff’s history of bowel obstructions; Judge 
Hummel’s failure to credit Plaintiff’s testimony regarding White and accompanying disregard of 



3 Plaintiff states, “The defendants are using the deposition that was taken of plaintiff, that 
plaintiff never received a copy of, and was not allowed to make [sic] any correction to the 
answers he made during the deposition as is required. . .defendants [have] also refused to 
disclose the audio/video tapes of Wilson speaking to Plaintiff reporting his medical condition, 
pleading for help.” Dkt. No. 77 at 7.                                     
Plaintiff’s version of the facts; and relatedly, whether Judge Hummel misread the record 
regarding White’s knowledge of Plaintiff’s pain.                          
    Under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56: “The court shall grant summary judgment if 
the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is 

entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a) (emphasis added). At the summary 
judgment stage, “[t]he question is not whether th[e] proof will ultimately be found convincing or 
persuasive. That would be an issue for trial. Rather, the question is only whether the parties have 
proof for their claims and defenses such that a trial is needed.” 11 Moore’s Fed. Prac. Civ. § 
56.02 (2022). Moreover, when assessing a motion for summary judgment—even if there is no 
dispute as to any material fact—the court must then determine whether the moving party is 
entitled to judgment as a matter of law: “The nonexistence of a factual dispute is a mere 
predicate to summary judgment, and is never, by itself, dispositive of the motion. For example, if 
the facts are undisputed but there is more than one legally permissible conclusion that could be 
drawn from those facts, a trial will be required and summary judgment must be denied.” Id. 

Therefore, the Court must determine whether it should accept, reject, or modify Judge Hummel’s 
recommendation to grant Defendants’ Motion for Summary Judgment with respect to Plaintiff’s 
Eighth Amendment medical indifference claims against Wilson and White.    
    The Eighth Amendment to the Constitution prohibits the infliction of “cruel and unusual 
punishments . . . .” U.S. Const. amend. VIII. “In order to establish an Eighth Amendment claim 
arising out of inadequate medical care, a prisoner must prove ‘deliberate indifference to [his] 
serious medical needs.’” Chance v. Armstrong, 143 F.3d 698, 702 (2d Cir. 1998) (quoting Estelle 
v. Gamble, 429 U.S. 97, 104 (1976)). “The standard of deliberate indifference includes both 
subjective and objective components.” Chance, 143 F.3d at 702. “‘First, the alleged deprivation 
must be, in objective terms, sufficiently serious.” Id. (cleaned up) (quoting Hathaway v. 
Coughlin, 37 F.3d 63, 66 (2d Cir. 1994)). “Second, the defendant ‘must act with a sufficiently 
culpable state of mind.” Chance, 143 F.3d at 702 (quoting Hathaway, 37 F.3d at 66). “An official 
acts with the requisite deliberate indifference when that official ‘knows of and disregards an 

excessive risk to inmate health or safety; the official must both be aware of facts from which the 
inference could be drawn that a substantial risk of serious harm exists, and he must also draw the 
inference.’” Chance, 143 F.3d at 702 (quoting Farmer v. Brennan, 511 U.S. 825, 837 (1994)). 
    Under the first, objective prong of an Eighth Amendment medical indifference claim, the 
Court must “[d]etermin[e] whether a deprivation is an objectively serious deprivation [and that] 
entails two inquiries.” Salahuddin v. Goord, 467 F.3d 263, 279 (2d Cir. 2006). “The first inquiry 
is whether the prisoner was actually deprived of adequate medical care.” Id. “As the Supreme 
Court has noted, the prison official’s duty is only to provide reasonable care.” Id. (citing Farmer, 
511 U.S. at 844–47). “Thus, ‘prison officials who act reasonably [in response to an inmate-health 
risk] cannot be found liable under the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause,’ and, conversely, 

failing ‘to take reasonable measures’ in response to a medical condition can lead to liability.” 
Salahuddin, 467 F.3d at 279–80 (citations omitted) (quoting Farmer, 511 U.S. at 845, 847). 
    “Second, the objective test asks whether the inadequacy of medical care is sufficiently 
serious. This inquiry requires the court to examine how the offending conduct is inadequate and 
what harm, if any, the inadequacy has caused or will likely cause the prisoner.” Salahuddin, 467 
F.3d at 280. “For example, if the unreasonable medical care is a failure to provide any treatment 
for an inmate’s medical condition, courts examine whether the inmate’s medical condition is 
sufficiently serious.” Id. “The Second Circuit has stated that a medical need is ‘serious’ for 
constitutional purposes if it presents ‘a condition of urgency that may result in degeneration or 
extreme pain.’” Bumpus v. Canfield, 495 F. Supp. 2d 316, 320 (W.D.N.Y. 2007) (cleaned up) 
(quoting Chance, 143 F.3d at 702). “Among the relevant factors for determining whether a 
serious medical need exist are ‘[t]he existence of an injury that a reasonable doctor or patient 
would find important and worthy of comment or treatment; the presence of a medical condition 

that significantly affects an individual’s daily activities; or the existence of chronic and 
substantial pain.’” Bumpus, 495 F. Supp. 2d at 320 (quoting Chance, 143 F.3d at 702). 
         1.   Plaintiff’s Remaining Objection Concerning Wilson          
    Plaintiff’s first specific objection relates to Judge Hummel’s conclusion about Plaintiff’s 
contradictory evidence. Judge Hummel found that, in an attempt to create a dispute of material 
fact regarding Wilson’s knowledge of Plaintiff’s abdominal pain, Plaintiff provides an affidavit 
and claims he “‘showed [Wilson his] vomit’ and made Wilson aware of his ‘prior issues with 
bowel obstructions.’ However, these assertions are contradicted by his deposition testimony.” R. 
& R. at 13 (citations omitted). The Court agrees with Judge Hummel’s conclusion that there is no 
dispute of material fact as to whether Wilson saw Plaintiff’s vomit. After being asked if he could 

recall his first interaction with Wilson, Dkt. No. 59-5 at 32–33 (“Plaintiff’s Deposition”), all 
Plaintiff admitted to saying to Wilson was that Wilson should “calm down.” Id. at 33. Plaintiff 
was asked again in his deposition about his second encounter with Wilson, Id. at 39–43, and 
Plaintiff merely testified that he “told” Wilson he was vomiting, not that he “showed” the vomit 
to Wilson. Id. at 44.                                                     
    Plaintiff argues, however, that on page 65 and 67 of his deposition, he showed Wilson his 
vomit. See Obj. at 7. But page 65 of Plaintiff’s deposition describes only how Plaintiff felt the 
day he was sick, but never actually mentions that he showed his vomit to Wilson. See Pl.’s Dep. 
at 65. Similarly, Page 67 mentions only that Plaintiff “knows [his own] symptoms, and . . .  
[knows] the excruciating pain in my stomach and I continuously throw[] up, and I’m telling her 
that.” Pl.’s Dep. At 67.                                                  
    “[A] party may not create an issue of fact by submitting an affidavit in opposition to a 
summary judgment motion that, by omission or addition, contradicts the affiant’s previous 

deposition testimony.” (internal quotation marks and citations omitted) See Guarino v. St. John 
Fisher College, 553 F.Supp. 2d 252, 259 (W.D.N.Y. 2008), aff’d 321 F. App’x 55 (2d Cir. 2009) 
(summary order). Thus, because Plaintiff seeks to contradict his testimony post hoc, his objection 
with respect to whether Wilson viewed and became aware of Plaintiff’s vomit, fails.  
    However, Plaintiff does testify that he “just [told] [Wilson] that [he] had [bowel 
obstructions before].” Pl.’s Dep. at 67. Thus, Plaintiff provided testimony demonstrating that 
Wilson was aware of his history of bowel obstructions. Nevertheless, after being made aware of 
these obstructions, Plaintiff concedes that Wilson performed a medical examination of Plaintiff’s 
stomach. Pl.’s Dep. at 40–41. Wilson used a stethoscope to listen for sounds in his abdomen and 
listened to his abdomen as she pushed in various places on his abdomen. Id. at 41. Wilson asked 

Plaintiff where he was feeling pain as she palpitated his abdomen. Id. at 40. When Wilson 
examined Plaintiff, she did not identify any objective signs that Plaintiff was suffering from a 
bowel obstruction or other medical emergency. See Dkt. No. 59-2, (“Wilson Declaration”) ¶¶ 39-
40. Wilson testified that she found that Plaintiff’s vital signs were normal, there were no sounds 
present in his abdomen characteristic of a bowel obstruction, Plaintiff’s abdomen appeared to be 
flat and not swollen or distorted, and no spasms typically associated with a bowel obstruction 
were present. Id. ¶¶20-25, ¶¶39-40.                                       
    Thus, Plaintiff received treatment for the pain he complained about. Importantly, the 
Eighth Amendment does not guarantee prisoners a right to the medical treatment of their 
choosing, and prison medical personnel maintain discretion to determine what method of care 
and treatment to provide to their patients. Cf. Estelle, 429 U.S. at 107 (finding that “the question 
whether an X-ray or additional diagnostic techniques or forms of treatment is indicated is a 
classic example of a matter for medical judgment” and does not give rise to constitutional 

protections); see also Vargas v. State of New York Dep’t of Corr. Services, No. 93-CV-7337, 
1996 WL 631722, at *4 (S.D.N.Y. Oct. 31, 1996) (holding that a medical decision not to 
prescribe certain medications does not represent cruel and unusual punishment, but at most rises 
to a claim for medical malpractice). As a result, Judge Hummel properly found that “This claim, 
at most, amounts to a disagreement with Wilson’s medical judgment, and does not give rise to an 
Eighth Amendment claim. See Veloz v. New York, 339 F.Supp. 2d 505, 525 (S.D.N.Y. 2004) 
(concluding that the plaintiff’s contention that the defendant denied him pain medication 
amounted to a disagreement with a medical provider over a treatment plan and does not 
implicate the Eighth Amendment). R. & R. at 12. Thus, there is no genuine dispute of material 
fact regarding Plaintiff’s Eighth Amendment claims against Wilson, and Wilson is entitled to 

judgment as a matter of law.                                              
         2.  Plaintiff’s Remaining Objections Regarding White            
    Judge Hummel also found with respect to Plaintiff’s Eighth Amendment claim against 
White: “Even assuming Upson communicated that he felt as though he was having an emergency 
and vomiting, the mere fact that Upson made this statement does not suffice to prove that these 
conditions actually existed.” The Court, however, agrees with Plaintiff that, a court “cannot in its 
ruling disbelieve Plaintiff’s version of the events, or his facts as submitted as proof [of] his 
claims” when deciding whether to grant summary judgment. See Redd v. N.Y. State Div. of 
Parole, 678 F.3d 166, 174 (2d Cir. 2012) (“Credibility determinations, the weighing of the 
evidence, and the drawing of legitimate inferences from the facts are jury functions, not those of 
a judge.”).                                                               
    However, Plaintiff’s claim fails not because Judge Hummel failed to give proper weight 
to Plaintiff’s evidence, but rather because Plaintiff provided no evidence that White knew of 

Plaintiff’s vomiting or visible distress. See generally Pl.’s Dep. Indeed, Judge Hummel’s 
statement to which Plaintiff objects to occurred in the context of a counterfactual, and as Judge 
Hummel notes, “Upson does not proffer evidence demonstrating that he was suffering from 
visible distress when he spoke with White at his cell.” R. & R. at 14 (citing Dkt. No. 70 at 25). 
Thus, Plaintiff does not provide evidence that White knew of and disregarded an “excessive risk 
to his health” under the subjective prong of the Eighth Amendment analysis. Farmer, 511 U.S. at 
837.                                                                      
    The final statement that Plaintiff objects to concerns Judge Hummel’s conclusion that 
“Upson failed to prove that White intentionally delayed his access to ‘medical care at a time 
when he was in extreme pain[,]’ made his medical problems known [to] White[,] or that he was 

completely denied medical treatment.” R. & R. at 14. The Court agrees with Judge Hummel. 
Plaintiff testified that White walked past his cell on a single occasion while she was performing 
other medical duties, but in her momentary passing, Plaintiff never communicated the pain he 
was in. Pl.’s Dep. at 52. Plaintiff does not claim that White examined Plaintiff, but rather that she 
instructed him to “put in for sick call,” so that he could be seen by a different member of the 
medical staff. Id. at 49-50. Thus, Plaintiff does not provide evidence that Plaintiff informed 
White in this momentary passing of any history of bowel obstructions or discussed with her the 
symptoms that he was experiencing. See generally Pl.’s Dep. As a result, Plaintiff has failed to 
raise a genuine dispute of material fact as to whether White knew of and disregarded an 
excessive risk to Plaintiff's health or safety. 
      The Court reviews for clear error the other portions of the Report-Recommendation to 
which neither party filed objections. The Court finds no clear error. Therefore, the Court adopts 
the remaining portions of the Report-Recommendation in their entirety. 
V.     CONCLUSION 
      Accordingly, it is hereby: 
      ORDERED, that the Report-Recommendation (Dkt. No. 71) is APPROVED and 
ADOPTED in  its entirety; and it is further 
      ORDERED, that Defendants’ Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. No. 59) is 
GRANTED, and it is further 
      ORDERED, that the Complaint (Dkt. No. 1) be DISMISSED in its entirety without 
leave to amend; and it is further 
      ORDERED, that the Clerk close this action; and it is further 
      ORDERED, that the Clerk serve a copy of this Memorandum-Decision and Order on all 
parties in accordance with the Local Rules. 
      IT IS SO ORDERED. 

DATED:     September 30, 2022 
            Albany, New York 
                                    LAW     CE E. KAHN 
                                    United States District Judge 

                                      17

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                                              
NORTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                                             
JAMEL UPSON,                                                              
               Plaintiff,                                            
-against-                          9:18-CV-1149 (LEK/CFH)            
GERALDINE WILSON, et al.,                                                 
               Defendants.                                           

                  DECISION AND ORDER                                 
I.   INTRODUCTION                                                         
This is a civil rights suit brought by pro se plaintiff Jamel Upson against defendants
Nurse Geraldine Wilson, Nurse Elizabeth White, Correction Officer Shawn Woods, John Doe

#1, John Doe #2, and Nurse Deborah Shipman under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. Dkt. No. 1
(“Complaint”). In a Report-Recommendation issued on July 23, 2020, the Honorable Christian F.
Hummel, U.S. Magistrate Judge, granted in part and denied in part Defendants’ motion to
dismiss pursuant to Rule 12(b)(6) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. See Dkt. No. 42
(“Report-Recommendation”). For the reasons that follow, the Court adopts the Report-
Recommendation in its entirety.                                           
II.  BACKGROUND                                                           
 Plaintiff’s factual allegations are detailed in the Report-Recommendation, familiarity

with which is assumed. See R. & R. at 2–5. For convenience, the Court summarizes them here.
Plaintiff’s allegations stem from the time that he was confined in a Special Housing Unit
(“SHU”) at Upstate Correctional Facility (“Upstate C.F.”). Id. at 2. Prior to April 30, 2015,
Plaintiff sustained an abdominal gunshot wound that caused him to suffer recurring bowel
obstructions that led to hospitalizations in the past. Id. at 2-3. On April 30, 2015, Plaintiff began 
experiencing symptoms of a severe bowel obstruction. Id. at 3. Plaintiff told Woods that he was 
experiencing a medical emergency and needed assistance. Id. Wilson arrived 30 minutes later, 
ignored Plaintiff's concerns, and left. Id. Later that day, Plaintiff was “taken to Medical” where 
Wilson again dismissed his symptoms. Id. (quoting Compl. at 3-4). Plaintiff then returned to his 
cell. Id, Subsequently, Plaintiff asked Woods to summon medical assistance, but Woods 
responded that “there was nothing he could do.” Id. (quoting Compl. at 4). Later that day, 
Plaintiff asked John Doe #1—a correction officer—to summon aid. Id. A nurse responded and 
left without providing any assistance. Id. Plaintiff complained to  John Doe #1, to which Doe 
responded that “there was nothing he could do.” Id. (quoting Compl. at 4). The following 
morning, Plaintiff complained to White, who told him to “put in for sick call.” Id. (quoting 
Compl. at 4). When Plaintiff complained about the lack of medical treatment to another 
correction officer,  John Doe #2, Doe also responded that “there was nothing he could do.” Id. at 
4 (quoting Compl. at 4). Later that day Plaintiff consulted Shipman, who, after some time, 
admitted Plaintiff to the facility’s infirmary. See id. Plaintiff was transported to a hospital and 
stayed there for five days in order to have his “backed up waste . . . pumped out.” Id. (quoting 
Compl. at 5). 
 On September 24, 2018, Plaintiff commenced this action by filing a pro se civil rights 
complaint. Id, In a Decision and Order filed on December 10, 2018, the Court conducted an 
initial review of the Complaint and directed Defendants to respond to Plaintiff's Eighth 
Amendment medical indifference claims and identify certain Defendants. See id. at 4-5; Dkt. No.

6. Defendants moved to dismiss the Complaint pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6). See R. & R.
at 5.                                                                     
Now before the Court is a Report-Recommendation filed by the Honorable Christian F.
Hummel, U.S. Magistrate Judge, granting in part and denying in part Defendants’ motion to

dismiss. Dkt. No. 42. For the reasons that follow, the Court adopts the Report-Recommendation
in its entirety.                                                          
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW                                                   
A.  The Report-Recommendation                                        
Within fourteen days after a party has been served with a copy of a magistrate judge’s
report-recommendation, the party “may serve and file specific, written objections to the proposed
findings and recommendations.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b); L.R. 72.1(c). If objections are timely

filed, a court “shall make a de novo determination of those portions of the report or specified
proposed findings or recommendations to which objection is made.” 28 U.S.C. § 636(b).
However, if no objections are made, or if an objection is general, conclusory, perfunctory, or a
mere reiteration of an argument made to the magistrate judge, a district court need review that
aspect of a report-recommendation only for clear error. Barnes v. Prack, No. 11-CV-857, 2013
WL 1121353, at *1 (N.D.N.Y. Mar. 18, 2013); Farid v. Bouey, 554 F. Supp. 2d 301, 306–07
(N.D.N.Y. 2008), abrogated on other grounds by Widomski v. State Univ. of N.Y. at Orange,
748 F.3d 471 (2d Cir. 2014); see also Machicote v. Ercole, No. 06-CV-13320, 2011 WL

3809920, at *2 (S.D.N.Y. Aug. 25, 2011) (“[E]ven a pro se party’s objections to a Report and
Recommendation must be specific and clearly aimed at particular findings in the magistrate’s

                           3                                         
proposal ....”). “A [district] judge ..  . may accept, reject, or modify, in whole or in part, the 
findings or recommendations made by the magistrate judge.” § 636(b). 
IV.    DISCUSSION 
 Plaintiff did not file objections to the Report-Recommendation. See Docket. 
Consequently, the Court reviews the Report-Recommendation for clear error and finds none. 
Therefore, the Court adopts the Report-Recommendation in its entirety. 
V.     CONCLUSION 
 Accordingly, it is hereby: 
 ORDERED, that the Report-Recommendation (Dkt. No. 42) is APPROVED and 
ADOPTED in  its entirety; and it is further 
 ORDERED, that the motion to dismiss (Dkt. No. 22) be GRANTED in part and 
DENIED in part. Plaintiff's Eighth Amendment deliberate indifference claim against Geraldine 
Wilson and Elizabeth White can proceed; and it is further 
 ORDERED, that the clerk shall TERMINATE defendants Shawn Woods, John Doe #1, 
John Doe #2, and Deborah Shipman from the docket; and it is further 
 ORDERED, that the Clerk serve a copy of this Decision and Order on all parties in 
accordance with the Local Rules. 
 IT IS SO ORDERED. 

DATED:     September 16, 2020 
       Albany, New York               Fan SSeoo E Kahn 
                                    US. District Judge

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                                              
NORTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                                             
_____________________________________                                     

JAMEL UPSON,                                                              

              Plaintiff,                                                 

         -v-                           9:18-CV-1149 (AJB/PJE)            

GERALDINE WILSON,                                                         

              Defendant.                                                 
_____________________________________                                     

Hon. Anthony Brindisi, U.S. District Judge:                               
                   ORDER on MOTIONS IN LIMINE                            
I.   INTRODUCTION                                                         
    Seven years ago, Jamel Upson (“plaintiff”) filed this Section 1983 action asserting claims 
against several nurses and corrections officers (collectively, “defendants”) for violations of his 
Eighth Amendment rights.  Dkt. No. 1.  Broadly, plaintiff alleged that defendants were 
deliberately indifferent to his serious medical needs while he was incarcerated at Upstate 
Correctional Facility (“Upstate”) in 2015.  Id.  After several rounds of motion practice, Nurse 
Geraldine Wilson (“defendant”) is the sole remaining defendant.  Dkt. No. 93. 
    This case is set for a jury trial beginning on Tuesday, October 14, 2025, at 9:00 a.m. in 
Utica, New York.  Presently before the Court are the parties’ pre-trial motions in limine, Dkt. 
Nos. 124, 127, 140, which have been fully briefed.  Dkt. Nos. 134, 146.  The Court heard 
argument from the parties at the final pretrial conference on October 7, 2025.   
II.  LEGAL STANDARD                                                       
    A motion in limine’s purpose is to streamline the trial with rulings about the forecasted 
evidence’s admissibility or anticipated arguments’ permissibility.  See, e.g., Luce v. United 
States, 469 U.S. 3, 40 n.2 (1984); Palmieri v. Defaria, 88 F.3d 136, 141 (2d Cir. 1996) (reducing 

interruptions); United States v. Wagner, 651 F. Supp. 3d 594, 598 n.1 (N.D.N.Y. 2023) (applying 
to arguments).                                                            
    “Evidence should be excluded on a motion in limine only when the evidence is clearly 
inadmissible on all potential grounds.”  Walker v. Schult, 365 F. Supp. 3d 266, 275 (N.D.N.Y. 
2019) (citation omitted).  “The movant has the burden of establishing that the evidence is not 
admissible for any purpose.”  Id.  “The trial judge may reserve judgment on a motion in limine 
until trial to ensure the motion is considered in the proper factual context.”  Id.  Finally, “[t]he 
court’s ruling regarding a motion in limine is subject to change when the case unfolds.”  Id. 
III.  DISCUSSION                                                          
A.  Criminal Convictions                                                 
    Under Rule 609(a)(1)(A), felony convictions must be admitted to impeach a witness’s 

character for truthfulness unless the probative value of the conviction evidence is substantially 
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.  Fed. R. Evid. 609(a)(1)(A); Fed. R. Evid. 403.   
    In weighing “probative value against prejudicial effect . . . courts examine: ‘(1) the 
impeachment value of the prior crime, (2) the remoteness of the prior conviction, (3) the 
similarity between the past crime and the conduct at issue, and (4) the importance of the 
credibility of the witness.’”  Coleman v. Durkin, 585 F. Supp. 3d 208, 213 (N.D.N.Y. 2022) 
(quoting Daniels v. Loizzo, 986 F. Supp. 245, 250 (S.D.N.Y. 1997)).  Though all factors are 
relevant, “[p]rime among them is whether the crime, by its nature, is probative of a lack of 
veracity.”  U.S. v. Ortiz, 553 F.2d 782, 784 (2d Cir. 1977).              
    Rule 609(a)(1)(A) presumptively allows “inquiry into the ‘essential facts’ of the 
conviction, including the nature or statutory name of each offense, its date, and the sentence 
imposed, U.S. v. Estrada, 430 F.3d 606, 616 (2d Cir. 2005), but the district court has “wide 
discretion to impose limitations on the cross-examination of witnesses,” U.S. v. Flaharty, 295 

F.3d 182, 191 (2d Cir. 2002).                                             
    For instance, courts have excluded evidence of the statutory name of an offense and the 
length of the sentence imposed.  See U.S. v. Brown, 606 F. Supp. 2d 306 (E.D.N.Y. 2009); see, 
e.g., Hines v. Huff, 2019 WL 3574246, at *2 (N.D.N.Y. Aug. 6, 2019) (precluding reference to 
statutory name of offense and sentence imposed); Ridge v. Davis, 639 F. Supp. 3d 465, 475 
(S.D.N.Y. 2022) (same).                                                   
 1.  Plaintiff’s Criminal Convictions (Def’s MIL #1 & Pl.’s MIL #1A)     
    Defendant seeks to impeach plaintiff by inquiring into the essential facts of his criminal 
convictions, including the names and dates of the offenses, and the sentences imposed.  Dkt. No. 
124 at 5–6.  Plaintiff concedes that evidence of his felony convictions is admissible pursuant to 
Rule 609(a)(1)(A), but urges the Court to preclude defendant from inquiring into the statutory 

names and the sentences imposed.  Dkt. No. 127 at 4–6.                    
    “Plaintiff has two convictions for attempted murder in the second degree and two 
convictions for criminal possession of a weapon in the second degree.”  Dkt. No. 127 (Pl.’s 
Mem.) at 3; see also Dkt. No. 124 at 6.  Plaintiff was convicted of one count of attempted murder 
and two counts of criminal possession of a weapon on December 10, 2010, and one additional 
count of attempted murder on November 14, 2013.  Dkt. No. 124 at 6.  Plaintiff is serving a 
twenty-two (22) year term of imprisonment based on these convictions.  Dkt. No. 124 at 6.   
    Because plaintiff remains incarcerated on these convictions, the essential facts of the 
convictions are presumptively admissible under Rule 609(a)(1)(A), unless the Court determines, 
upon consideration of the relevant factors, “that the probative value of that evidence ‘is 
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice . . . ‘“  See Estrada, 430 F.3d at 620–
21 (quoting Fed. R. Evid. 403).                                           
    The first two factors (i.e., impeachment value and remoteness) weigh against admission.  

Plaintiff’s convictions are for violent offenses that “have little or no direct bearing on honesty 
and veracity.”  Estrada, 430 F.3d at 617.  And, at twelve and fifteen years old, respectively, 
plaintiff’s convictions are fairly remote.  See U.S. v. Vasquez, 840 F. Supp. 2d 564, 570 
(E.D.N.Y. 2011) (finding that six-, eight-, and twelve-year-old convictions had “diminished 
probative value”).                                                        
    Conversely, the third and fourth factors weigh in favor of admission.  The third factor 
concerns the similarity of the crimes of conviction and the conduct at issue.  Coleman, 585 F. 
Supp. 3d at 213.  This factor weighs in favor of admission because plaintiff’s convictions do not 
concern conduct similar to that at issue here.  The fourth factor—importance of the credibility of 
the witness—also militates in favor of admission, because plaintiff’s credibility is a central issue 

in this case.                                                             
    In sum, the Court finds that evidence of plaintiff’s convictions should be admitted for 
impeachment purposes, but limited in the following ways to avoid the danger of unfair prejudice.   
    First, the Court agrees with plaintiff that defendant should be precluded from referencing 
the statutory names of his convictions.  Plaintiff’s convictions for attempted murder and criminal 
possession of a weapon—both violent felonies—are minimally probative of his veracity, but 
create a significant danger of unfair prejudice.  See Diggs v. Guynup, 621 F. Supp. 3d 315, 320 
(N.D.N.Y. 2022) (Sannes, J.) (finding probative value of statutory names of “[p]laintiff’s 
convictions for attempted murder and weapons possession . . . substantially outweighed by the 
danger of unfair prejudice”).                                             
    Second, for similar reasons, defendant should be precluded from inquiring into the 
sentences imposed for plaintiff’s convictions.  As plaintiff points out, “[b]y the nature of this 

case, the jury will know that [p]laintiff has been incarcerated on one or more felony convictions 
since at least 2012.”  Dkt. No. 127 at 6.  Additional inquiry into the length of plaintiff’s overall 
sentence adds little to no probative value, but “creates a danger of unfair prejudice[,] because the 
jury might infer from its length that [p]laintiff committed a serious violent crime, and unfairly 
decide this case.”  Hines, 2019 WL 3574246, at *2.                        
    Ultimately, although plaintiff’s credibility is a central issue in this case, neither the 
statutory names of his convictions nor the sentences imposed carry any probative value as to his 
credibility, but both present a significant danger of unfair prejudice.   
    Accordingly, plaintiff’s motion to exclude evidence of the statutory names of his criminal 
convictions and the sentences imposed is GRANTED, and defendant may refer only to the fact 

that plaintiff has been incarcerated on one or more felonies since at least 2012.  Defendant’s 
cross-motion is DENIED with respect to any other details of the conviction.  
 2.  Incarcerated Nonparty Witness Alexander Screahben’s Criminal Convictions 
     (Def.’s MIL #2A & Pl.’s MIL #1B)                                    
    Defendant seeks to impeach incarcerated non-party witness Alexander Screahben by 
inquiring about his three felony convictions.  Dkt. No. 124 at 9.  Plaintiff argues that defendant 
should be precluded from referencing the statutory names of Screahben’s convictions, the 
number of convictions, and the maximum sentence of imprisonment Screahben faces for those 
convictions.  Dkt. No. 134 at 4.                                          
    Screahben was convicted of two counts of robbery in the first degree in 2004, and he pled 
guilty to assault in the second degree in 2013.  Dkt. No. 124 at 9.  Screahben is currently serving 
a twenty-seven-year sentence.  Id.                                        
    Because Screahben remains incarcerated on these convictions, the essential facts of the 

convictions are presumptively admissible under Rule 609(a)(1)(A), unless the Court determines, 
upon consideration of the relevant factors, “that the probative value of that evidence ‘is 
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice . . . ’” See Estrada, 430 F.3d at 620–
21 (quoting Fed. R. Evid. 403).                                           
    The first two factors (i.e., impeachment value and remoteness) weigh against admission.  
Although robbery is a theft crime, and theft crimes “bear on a witness’s propensity to testify 
truthfully,” Estrada, 430 F.3d at 621, “[robbery] requires the use of force and has ‘more of the 
characteristics of a crime of violence,’ which has less probative value on credibility,” Diggs, 621 
F. Supp. 3d at 321 (quoting U.S. v. Crumble, 2018 WL 2016852, at *7–*8 (E.D.N.Y. May 1, 
2018)).  The remoteness of Screahben’s robbery convictions (i.e., twenty-one years) further 

diminishes their probative value.  See Brown v. Cornell, 2021 WL 2711511, at *4 (N.D.N.Y. 
July 1, 2021) (D’Agostino, J.) (“Plaintiff’s robbery conviction is approximately ten-years old; 
this factor diminishes the probative value of Plaintiff’s convictions.”) (internal quotation 
omitted).  Screahben’s 2013 assault conviction, as a relatively remote conviction for a violent 
offense, similarly lacks probative value..                                
    The third and fourth factors, again, weigh in favor of admission.  The third factor, which 
concerns the similarity between the past crime and the conduct at issue, weighs in favor of 
admission, because, as plaintiff points out, “Screahben’s crimes of conviction do not bear any 
similarity to any conduct at issue in this lawsuit.”  Dkt. No. 127 at 4.  The fourth factor, too, 
weighs in favor of admission because, like plaintiff, Screahben’s credibility is an important issue 
in this case.                                                             
    Taken together, the Court finds that evidence of Screahben’s convictions should be 
admitted, but limited in the following ways so as to avoid the danger of unfair prejudice.   

    First, the Court agrees with plaintiff that defendant should be precluded from referencing, 
or offering evidence of the statutory names of Screahben’s convictions.1  As violent offenses, 
Screahben’s crimes of conviction are “not particularly probative as to honesty and veracity.”  
Ash v. Johnston, 2021 WL 2826426, at *2 (N.D.N.Y. July 7, 2021).          
    Second, the Court finds that defendant should also be precluded from referencing both 
the number of convictions for which Screahben is incarcerated, and the maximum sentence 
Screahben faces.  At Screahben’s de bene esse deposition, conducted on September 8, 2025, 
defendant elicited the following testimony:                               
    Q: Okay, Now, previously you had been asked, with regard to your felonies – is it 
    correct that you are currently incarcerated with three felonies?     
    A.  Yes, sir.                                                        
    Q. Okay. Okay. And are you currently serving a maximum sentence of 27 years?  
    . . .                                                                
    A. Yes, sir.                                                         
Tr. of the Dep. of Alexander Screahben (“Screahben Dep.”) at 18:22–19:6.  
    Any probative value of the number of convictions for which Screahben is incarcerated, or 
the sentence imposed for Screahben’s convictions is negligible, because the jury will be aware 
that Screahben has been incarcerated on one or more felonies since at least 2015, when the 


1 Although defendant argues that this issue is moot because the statutory names of Screahben’s convictions were not 
elicited at his de bene esse deposition, defendant has expressed an intent to offer “Crime and Sentencing Information 
for Alexander Screahben” as a defense exhibit.  See Dkt. No. 117 at 2.    
subject incident occurred.  See Screahben Dep. 9:10–10:7; see also Diggs, 621 F. Supp. 3d 315, 
321 (N.D.N.Y. 2022) (“[A]ny incremental probative value of impeachment with all three robbery 
convictions would be substantially outweighed by a danger of unfair prejudice.”).   
    Accordingly, plaintiff’s motion to exclude evidence of the statutory names of Alexander 

Screahben’s criminal convictions, the number of those convictions, and the sentence imposed for 
those convictions is GRANTED.  Defendant’s cross-motion is DENIED with respect to any 
other details of the convictions.                                         
 3.  Related Exhibits (Pl.’s MIL #2)                                     
    Plaintiff has moved to preclude admission of Defendant’s Exhibit 1, which is described 
as “Plaintiff’s crime and sentencing information,” and Defendant’s Exhibit 14, which is 
described as “Crime and Sentencing Information for Alexander Screahben.”  Dkt. No. 127 at 5.  
Defendant has not opposed.                                                
    Because defendant is precluded from referencing the statutory names of plaintiff’s and 
Screahben’s convictions and the sentences imposed for those convictions, supra Points A.1–2, 
Defendant’s Exhibits 1 and 14 must also be excluded.                      

    Accordingly, plaintiff’s motion to exclude Defendant’s Exhibit 1 (“Plaintiff’s crime and 
sentencing information”) and Defendant’s Exhibit 14 (“Crime and Sentencing Information for 
Alexander Screahben”) is GRANTED.                                         
B.  Disciplinary History of Alexander Screahben (Def.’s MIL #2B & Pl.’s MIL #3) 
    Defendant seeks to attack Screahben’s character for truthfulness by introducing evidence 
of his prison disciplinary history.  Dkt. No. 124 at 9–10.  Plaintiff argues that the specific 
disciplinary infraction at issue lacks probative value.  Dkt. No. 134 at 5. 
    “Rule 608(b) states that the court may, on cross-examination of a witness, allow inquiry 
as to specific instances of conduct, ‘if they are probative of the character for truthfulness or 
untruthfulness of . . . the witness, or another witness whose character the witness being cross-
examined has testified about.’”  Tapp v. Tougas, 2018 WL 1918605, at *3 (N.D.N.Y. Apr. 20, 
2018) (quoting Fed. R. Evid. 608(b)).                                     
    In 2016, Screahben pleaded guilty to a disciplinary charge of false information.  Dkt. No. 

124-6 at 4–5.  “While a disciplinary conviction for false information may relate to a witness’s 
credibility, the Court must consider whether the specific incident has probative value regarding 
the witness’s credibility.”  Jeanty v. Cerminaro, 2021 WL 2778572, at *6 (N.D.N.Y. July 2, 
2021).                                                                    
    According to prison records, while Screahben was incarcerated at Auburn Correctional 
Facility on January 13, 2016, a corrections officer instructed him to clean, he refused the order 
and told the officer that he had not yet eaten at the mess hall, but, according to another 
corrections officer, Screahben had already been to the mess hall.  Dkt. No. 124-6 at 5.   
    The Court finds that the specific conduct underlying Screahben’s disciplinary charge for 
false information has minimal probative value, warranting exclusion of those portions of 

Screahben’s deposition testimony that refer to his disciplinary history.  See Screahben Dep. at 
22:14–25:4.                                                               
    Further, because Rule 608(b) prohibits the introduction of extrinsic evidence of specific 
instances of conduct to attack a witness’s character for truthfulness, Fed. R. Evid. 608(b), 
defendant is also precluded from offering Defendant’s Exhibit 15, which is described as 
“Disciplinary History for Alexander Schraeben,” and Defendant’s Exhibit 16, which is described 
as “Screahben hearing packet for false info charge” at trial.             
    Accordingly, plaintiff’s motion to exclude testimony and evidence relating to 
Screahben’s disciplinary history is GRANTED, and defendant’s cross-motion to admit such 
evidence is DENIED.  Defendant is precluded from offering Defendant’s Exhibit 15, 
Defendant’s Exhibit 16, and any portion of Screahben’s testimony relating to his disciplinary 
history, see Screahben Dep. at 22:14–25:4, at trial.                      
C.  Objections to Screahben’s Deposition Designations                    
    In light of the foregoing, the Court rules on the parties’ objections to Screahben’s 
proposed testimony as follows:                                            

    12:12–13:10:  The objection is overruled.  The witness’s response was permissible 
    lay opinion testimony under Fed. R. Evid. 701.                       
    18:22–19:4:  The objection is sustained.  Defendant may not refer to the number of 
    convictions Screahben is incarcerated on or the maximum sentence faced for those 
    convictions.  See supra Point A.2.                                   
    23:6–8:  The objection is sustained.  Defendant may not refer to Screahben’s 
    disciplinary history.  See supra Point B.                            
    24:24–25:4:  The objection is sustained.  Id.                        
D.  References to Previously Dismissed Claims (Def.’s MIL #3)            
    Defendant seeks to preclude the admission of any evidence pertaining to claims 
previously dismissed in this action.  Dkt. No. 124 at 11.  Plaintiff represents that he does not 
intend to reference the previously dismissed claims themselves, but notes that “many facts which 
are relevant and admissible with respect to the remaining Eighth Amendment claim against 
[defendant] would be facts ‘pertaining’ or ‘relating’ to his previously dismissed claims.”  Dkt. 
No. 134 at 6.                                                             
    The Court agrees with defendant that “evidence relating solely to previously dismissed 
claims is irrelevant to the issues remaining for trial and is therefore inadmissible.”  Diggs, 621 F. 
Supp. 3d at 325–26 (emphasis added).                                      
    Accordingly, defendant’s motion is GRANTED, in part, to the extent that plaintiff seeks 
to refer to the dismissed claims themselves or admit evidence relating solely to dismissed parties 
or claims, but DENIED to the extent that such evidence relates directly to plaintiff’s remaining 
claim against defendant and the issue of damages.                         
E.  References to Indemnification (Def.’s MIL #5)                        
    Defendant seeks to preclude plaintiff from referencing the fact or possibility that 
defendant may be indemnified by the State of New York.  Dkt. No. 124 at 12.  Plaintiff has 
represented that he does not intend to do so.  Dkt. No. 134 at 7.         

    Accordingly, this motion is DENIED as moot, without prejudice to renew at trial, if 
necessary.                                                                
F.  References to a Specific Dollar Amount in Summation (Def.’s MIL #6)  
    Defendant seeks to preclude plaintiff from referencing a specific dollar amount of 
compensatory or punitive damages during summation.  Dkt. No. 124 at 13–14.  Plaintiff has 
represented that he does not intend to do so.  Dkt. No. 134 at 7.         
    Accordingly, this motion is DENIED as moot, without prejudice to renew at trial, if 
necessary.                                                                

G.  Plaintiff’s Other Lawsuits (Pl.’s MIL #4)                            
    Plaintiff has moved to preclude reference to two other lawsuits to which he is a party.  
Dkt. No. 127 at 8.  Defendant have not opposed this motion.               
    Accordingly, plaintiff’s motion is GRANTED, and defendant is precluded from making 
reference to, or offering evidence of, any other civil suits to which plaintiff is a party.   
H.  Civilian Clothing & Restraints (Pl.’s MIL #5)                        
    Plaintiff requests that he be allowed to wear civilian clothing and remain unrestrained 
during trial while in the presence of the jury.  Dkt. No. 127 at 8.  Defendant takes no position as 
to either request.                                                        
    Some courts in this district have granted similar requests in their entirety, Brisman v. 
Volpe, 2018 WL 3691236, at *4 (N.D.N.Y. Aug. 3, 2018); Outman v. Waldron, 2016 WL 
4435234, at *3 (N.D.N.Y. Aug. 19, 2016), while others have granted as to civilian clothing, but 
reserved on the issue of restraints until after consultation with the law enforcement officials 

transporting plaintiff on the morning of trial, Ash v. Johnston, 2021 WL 2826426, at *5 
(N.D.N.Y. July 7, 2021); Shepherd v. Smith, No. 2019 WL 5212883, at *1 n.1 (N.D.N.Y. Oct. 
16, 2019).                                                                
    Plaintiff’s request to wear civilian clothing during trial is GRANTED.  The Court will 
reserve ruling on the issue of restraints until the morning of trial.     
I.  Expert Testimony                                                     
 1.  Dr. Gupta (Def.’s MIL #4)                                           
    Defendant seeks to preclude plaintiff from presenting or eliciting expert testimony from 
Dr. Rahul Gupta, who treated plaintiff at Alice Hyde Medical Center (“Alice Hyde”).  Dkt. No. 
124 at 11.  Plaintiff has represented that he does not intend to elicit any expert opinion from Dr. 
Gupta as to either issue.  Dkt. No. 134 at 7.                             
    Accordingly, this motion is DENIED as moot, without prejudice to renew at trial, if 
necessary.                                                                

 2.  Dr. Schroyer (Pl.’s Supp. MIL)                                      
    Plaintiff has moved to exclude certain testimony of non-party witness Dr. Glen Schroyer, 
who briefly treated plaintiff at Upstate.  Dkt. No. 140.  In opposition, defendant argues that 
plaintiff waived any objections not raised at Dr. Schroyer’s de bene esse deposition and, 
regardless, Dr. Schroyer’s opinion testimony was “consistent with that of a treating physician 
and . . . should not be precluded.”  Dkt. No. 146 at 5.                   
  i.  Timeliness                                                         
    As a threshold matter, defendant contends that plaintiff’s motion should be denied 
because it was filed without leave and after the Court’s September 15, 2025, deadline for 
motions in limine.  Dkt. No. 146 at 1.  Though defendant is technically correct, her reasoning is 

flawed.                                                                   
    Dr. Schroyer’s deposition was not conducted until September 17, 2025—two days after 
the Court’s deadline—and plaintiff largely objects to Dr. Schroyer’s testimony on the ground 
that defendant improperly elicited expert opinions from Dr. Schroyer, who was disclosed only as 
a fact witness.  See generally, Dkt. No. 140.  The Court rejects the proposition that plaintiff was 
required to forecast defendant’s intent to elicit expert opinion testimony from a non-expert 
treating physician witness, in violation of the Rule 26 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.  
    Moreover, the trial order also states that:                          
    Not less than four weeks prior to the trial date, each party shall indicate to the 
    opposing party the portion of any video deposition to be offered . . .  In the case of 
    a dispute, counsel shall forward . . . the disputed portions of any deposition 
    transcript (including transcripts of any videotaped depositions) intended to be used 
    at trial at least one week before the Final Pre-Trial Conference.    
Dkt. No. 104 at 4. (emphasis in original).                                
    Because Dr. Schroyer’s deposition was not conducted until September 17, 2025, 
defendant could not possibly have indicated the portions of Dr. Schroyer’s testimony she 
intended to offer at trial within the prescribed time frame (i.e., at least four weeks prior to trial).  
Still, plaintiff managed to submit his objections to those designations one week before the final 
pre-trial conference, in compliance with the trial order.  Dkt. No. 140.   
    Accordingly, the Court declines to deny plaintiff’s motion on timeliness grounds. 
  ii. Waiver                                                             
    Defendant also argues that plaintiff waived any objections not raised at Dr. Schroyer’s 
deposition, because the deposition was taken de bene esse.  Dkt. No. 146 at 2–4.   
    A de bene esse deposition, also known as a deposition taken “in anticipation of future 

need,” is used to preserve the trial testimony of a witness who will likely be unavailable to testify 
at trial.  Black’s Law Dictionary (12th ed. 2024).  In that regard, testimony given de bene esse is 
typically treated in the same manner as testimony offered live at trial.  See Manley v. AmBase 
Corp., 337 F.3d 237, 248 (2d Cir. 2003) (acknowledging “district court’s directive that . . . de 
bene esse deposition ‘substitut[e] for trial testimony’”); George v. Ford Motor Co., 2007 WL 
2398806, at *12 (S.D.N.Y. Aug. 17, 2007) (Lynch, J.) (“Such a deposition . . . is a substitute for 
live testimony at trial.”).                                               
    Defendant argues that, because Dr. Schroyer’s de bene esse deposition was taken with the 
understanding that it would serve as Dr. Schroyer’s trial testimony, plaintiff waived any 
objections not raised at Dr. Schroyer’s deposition.  Dkt. No. 146 at 2.  Although the Court 

appreciates, and, in some sense agrees, with the premise of defendant’s argument, it overlooks a 
number of procedural missteps that militate against applying such a rigid approach in this case.   
    First and foremost, the parties entered the “usual stipulations” at the beginning of Dr. 
Schroyer’s deposition—ostensibly agreeing to reserve all rights under New York Civil Practice 
Law and Rules in the process.2  See Dkt. No. 140-1 (“Schroyer Dep.”) at 5:2–8:10.  Among 
those rights reserved was the right to object.  Specifically, the parties stipulated that “the failure 
to object to any question or to move to strike testimony at this examination shall not be a bar or 


2 The parties’ “usual stipulations” invoke the New York Civil Practice Law and Rules, which, of course, do not 
govern this federal action.  Nevertheless, the Court construes the stipulations agreed to by the parties according to 
their substance: That the failure to object to a question or move to strike testimony during the deposition does not 
waive any such objection, which remains reserved for trial.               
waiver to make such motion at, and is reserved for[,] the trial of this action.”  Id.  Accordingly, 
plaintiff has reserved his “right to object to any question, except as to form, or to move to strike 
any testimony.”  Schroyer Dep. at 5:8–9.                                  
    At the final pre-trial conference, defense counsel argued that the stipulation was 

erroneously entered into—seemingly insinuating that the court reporter mistakenly assumed that 
the deposition was a discovery deposition, rather than a deposition to be used at trial.3 
    Even assuming, arguendo, that the stipulation was somehow invalid, plaintiff has not 
waived his objections to Dr. Schroyer’s testimony under the applicable Federal Rules.  Federal 
Rule of Civil Procedure (“Rule”) 32 governs the use of depositions in court proceedings, 
generally.  See Fed. R. Civ. P. 32.  “By its terms, [Rule 32] draws no distinction between 
depositions taken for purposes of discovery and those taken for use at trial.”  Manley, 337 F.3d at 
247.  Put differently, there is no separate procedural rule for de bene esse depositions.4 
    Accordingly, the Court looks to Rule 32 to determine whether plaintiff has waived his 
objections to Dr. Schroyer’s testimony.  Rule 32(b) provides that:        

    (b) Subject to . . . subdivision (d)(3) of this rule, objection may be made at the trial 
    or hearing to receiving in evidence any deposition or part thereof for any reason 
    which would require the exclusion of the evidence if the witness were then present 
    and testifying . . .                                                 

3 Even if true, defense counsel offers no explanation as to why he assented to the terms of the stipulation. 
4 This was not always the case.  Before the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure were enacted, early federal judicial 
statutes provided for  “depositions de bene esse.”  In 1937, when the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure were first 
adopted, Rule 26 “incorporate[d], modif[ied], and broaden[ed] the provisions for depositions under U.S.C., Title 28, 
[former] §§ 639 (Depositions de bene esse; when and where taken; notice), 640 (Same; mode of taking), 641 (Same; 
transmission to court).”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 26 advisory committee’s note to 1937 adoption.   

After a rearrangement of discovery rules in 1970, the sections of Rule 26 that embodied historical de bene esse 
deposition rules landed in Rule 32, see Fed. R. Civ. P. 32 advisory committee’s note to 1970 amendment, further 
suggesting that, in the absence of a standalone de bene esse procedural rule, Rule 32 governs. 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 32.  Under subdivision (d)(3) of Rule 32:                 
    (d)(3)(A)  Objections  to  the  competency  of  a  witness  or  to  the  competency, 
    relevancy, or materiality of testimony are not waived by failure to make them 
    before or during the taking of the deposition, unless the ground of the objection is 
    one which might have been obviated or removed if presented at that time; [and] 
    (d)(3)(B) [e]rrors and irregularities occurring at the oral examination in the manner 
    of taking the deposition, in the form of the questions or answers, in the oath or 
    affirmation, or in the conduct of parties, and errors of any kind which might be 
    obviated, removed, or cured if promptly presented are waived unless seasonable 
    objection thereto is made at the taking of the deposition.           
Fed. R. Civ. P. 32.  “Rule 32(d)(3) distinguishes between objections of substance going to the 
admissibility of the testimony taken and formal objections to the form of the questions.”  8A 
Wright & Miller’s Federal Practice and Procedure § 2156 (3d ed.).         
    Here, plaintiff’s objection to the disputed portions of Dr. Schroyer’s testimony is 
primarily that “Dr. Schroyer exceeded the permissible scope of a treating physician’s testimony 
and offered improper expert testimony and opinions.”  Dkt. No. 140 at 2.  Because plaintiff’s 
objection is one of substance, going to the admissibility of Dr. Schroyer’s testimony and 
implicating the sufficiency of defendant’s disclosures, it could not have been obviated at the 
time, and, thus, has not been waived. 5                                   
  iii. Improper Expert Testimony                                         
    Turning to the merits of plaintiff’s motion, plaintiff argues that Dr. Schroyer, who was 
disclosed only as a fact witness, offered improper expert opinion testimony that went beyond 

5 Although this is the outcome demanded by the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and the equities in this case, Rule 
32 is hardly one size fits all.  De bene esse depositions should likely be governed by a separate rule, as they are 
distinguishable from discovery depositions in both form and function.  While parties may offer discovery deposition 
testimony at trial for impeachment, or where a witness has become unavailable to testify at trial, de bene esse 
depositions are intended to be conducted as if the witness were on the stand at trial. 
This distinction is important.  It means that a de bene esse deposition is shown in full to the jury, and counsel must 
put all objections on the record during the de bene esse deposition, in the same way they would if the testimony was 
being given live at trial.  Neither of these aspects of de bene esse depositions are reflected in Rule 32.  
opinions he formed during his treatment of plaintiff.  Dkt. No. 140 at 1.  Defendant maintains 
that “Dr. Schroyer is not being offered as an expert witness” and insists that Dr. Schroyer 
“provided testimony consistent with the guidelines set forth in Rosales v. LaValley as a treating 
physician.”  Dkt. No. 146 (citing Rosales v. LaValley 2014 WL 3477620 (N.D.N.Y. July 11, 

2014)) (emphasis in original).                                            
    “The law in the Second Circuit is clear that treating physicians and other medical 
professionals can testify as to their opinions without being disclosed as expert witnesses.”  
Rosales, 2014 WL 3477620, at *3.  “That is not to say, however, that the physician’s testimony 
is without parameters.”  Id.  “The key to what a treating physician can testify to without being 
declared an expert is based on his personal knowledge from consultation, examination and 
treatment of the [p]laintiff, not from information acquired from outside sources.”  Id. (internal 
citations omitted).                                                       
    Put differently, a treating physician “does not . . . need to be disclosed as an expert if he 
is testifying ‘solely as to that information the physician acquired through observation during 

treatment and limited to the facts obtained during treatment.’”  Goss v. Sealift Inc., 2024 WL 
670405, at *19 (E.D.N.Y. Jan. 17, 2024) (quoting Rodriguez v. Vill. of Port Chester, 535 F. 
Supp. 3d 202, 214 (S.D.N.Y. 2021)).                                       
    Under this standard, Dr. Schroyer is limited to testifying about opinions he formed during 
his treatment of plaintiff in 2015, which, as plaintiff points out, was extremely limited.  Indeed, 
Dr. Schroyer’s nominal involvement in plaintiff’s treatment can be distilled down to three 
“interactions.”                                                           
    First, on May 1, 2015, a nurse from Upstate made a phone call to Dr. Schroyer, who was 
the on-call physician at the time, and, together, they decided to send plaintiff to the Upstate 
infirmary.  Schroyer Dep. at 29:3–7, 30:3–5.  Later that evening, plaintiff saw a different 
physician via telemedicine, and that physician decided to transfer plaintiff to Alice Hyde, a 
nearby hospital, where he remained until he was discharged back to the Upstate infirmary on 
May 6, 2015.  Schroyer Dep. at 42:15–22.  Defendant does not contend that Dr. Schroyer had 

any involvement in the decision to transfer plaintiff to Alice Hyde, or the care plaintiff received 
while at Alice Hyde.  Dkt. No. 146 at 4.                                  
    Second, on May 7, 2015, Dr. Schroyer reviewed a discharge plan from Alice Hyde, 
examined plaintiff, and discharged him from the Upstate infirmary back to the cell block.  
Schroyer Dep. at 44:5–17, 65:22–66:20.                                    
    Third, on May 8, 2015, Dr. Schroyer was present during a telemedicine appointment 
between plaintiff and Dr. Rahul Gupta, the physician who treated plaintiff at Alice Hyde.  
Schroyer Dep. at 56:17–57:6.                                              
    Despite defendant’s contentions, Dr. Schroyer’s testimony went far beyond knowledge 
obtained and opinions formed during his treatment of plaintiff.  Indeed, Dr. Schroyer testified 

with regard to a plethora of plaintiff’s records neither prepared, nor reviewed, by him during the 
course of his treatment of plaintiff in 2015.  See, e.g., Schroyer Dep. at 40:11–41:6 (opining as to 
records of telemedicine visit with other physician who saw plaintiff after Dr. Schroyer’s phone 
call with Nurse Shipman); 42:15–25 (same); 43:10–13 (same); 45:20–23 (testifying as to opinion 
formed by treating physician at outside hospital); 48:22–50:5 (opining as to plaintiff’s treatment 
at outside hospital based on records from that hospital); 57:23–58:24 (offering opinion testimony 
as to treatment received from nurses other than Nurse Shipman).           
    Although the rules allow treating physicians to offer expert opinions formed during 
treatment, “they do not provide a testimonial blank check.”  Kaganovich . McDonough, 546 F. 
Supp. 3d 248, 274 (E.D.N.Y. 2021).  For example, courts in this circuit have routinely held that a 
“treating physician may not introduce information provided by other physicians to whom the 
[p]laintiff may have been referred[,] nor may the doctor present any medical reports received 
from other physicians regarding the [p]laintiff or opine on any information provided by another 

doctor.”  Spencer v. Intl. Shoppes, Inc., 2011 WL 4383046, at *4 (E.D.N.Y. Sept. 20, 2011); see 
also Rodriguez, 535 F. Supp. 3d at 216 (precluding testimony from treating physician that 
“expressly addresses [another physician]’s report, or the opinions of any other physicians”); 
Motta v. First Unum Life Ins. Co., 2011 WL 4374544, at *4 (E.D.N.Y. Sept. 19, 2011) 
(precluding non-expert treating physician from testifying “with regard to another physician’s 
records, opinion or recommendations” because “this information cannot be characterized as 
being within [his] personal knowledge”).                                  
    Defendant failed to elicit any testimony suggesting that Dr. Schroyer had personal 
knowledge of several records he opined about at his deposition.  At the final pre-trial conference, 
defense counsel made a late-breaking argument that Nurse Shipman’s testimony at trial will 

establish that Dr. Schroyer’s opinions were based on knowledge he obtained during plaintiff’s 
treatment in 2015.                                                        
    But, even assuming that Nurse Shipman could testify as to what information Dr. Schroyer 
was purportedly aware of during her phone call with him in 2015, it is defendant’s April 30, 
2015, treatment of plaintiff at issue in this case, and Dr. Schroyer’s own testimony makes clear 
that he had no personal knowledge of such treatment:                      
    Q. Now, you also discussed Nurse Wilson’s progress notes from April 30th, 2015, 
    the day before. You have no personal knowledge of Mr. Upson’s interactions with 
    Nurse Wilson on April 30th, 2015, correct?                           
    A. Correct.                                                          
    Q. And again, you didn’t personally see or evaluate Mr. Upson on April 30th, 2015, 
    right?                                                               
    A. Correct.                                                          
Schroyer Dep. at 62:4–12.                                                
    Lastly, the Court rejects defendant’s contention that limiting Dr. Schroyer’s testimony to 
opinions formed during his treatment of plaintiff would be “extremely prejudicial.”   
    As the Second Circuit has repeatedly acknowledged, district courts are afforded a wide 
latitude “both in determining whether evidence is admissible, Meloff v. New York Life Ins. Co., 
240 F.3d 138, 148 (2d Cir. 2001), and in controlling ‘the mode and order’ of its presentation to 
promote the effective ascertainment of the truth, Fed. R. Evid. 611(a).”  Manley, 337 F.3d at 247.   
    The exclusion of improper portions of Dr. Schroyer’s testimony is a consequence of 

defendant’s own (in)actions.  “If [d]efendant wanted to elicit testimony regarding the treatment 
decisions made by others . . . she was free to notice their depositions or request a de bene esse 
deposition.”  Dkt. No. 140 at 4.  Similarly, to the extent defendant wanted Dr. Schroyer to testify 
regarding the quality of care provided by others, she was free to disclose him as an expert 
witness.  It is not plaintiff’s responsibility to anticipate or take preemptive measures to deter 
defendant’s attempts to circumvent established rules of procedure.        
    Accordingly, and in light of the foregoing, the Court rules on plaintiff’s objections to Dr. 
Schroyer’s proposed testimony as follows:                                 
    26:2–8:  The  objection  is  overruled.  The  witness’s  answer  was  based  on  his 
    knowledge and within the scope of his treatment of plaintiff.        
    29:8–21: The objection is overruled.  The witness had sufficient knowledge to give 
    the answer.  He spoke with Nurse Shipman regarding her observations of plaintiff. 
    29:22–30:11: The objection is overruled.  Same.                      
    30:22–31:24: The objection is sustained. The witness cannot opine outside the 
    scope  of  his  treatment  of  plaintiff  and  may  not  offer  retrospectively  formed 
    opinions.                                                            
    31:25–32:10: The objection is sustained.  Same.                      
    32:11–21:  The objection is sustained.  The witness’s answer was speculative. 
    33:3–37:14:  The objection(s) are sustained.  The witness cannot opine outside the 
    scope  of  his  treatment  of  plaintiff  and  may  not  offer  retrospectively  formed 
    opinions.                                                            
    40:11–41:6:  The objection is sustained.  Same.                      
    41:17–24:  The objection is sustained.  Same.                        
    42:15–25:  The objection is sustained.  The witness’s answer was speculative. 
    43:10–13:  The objection is sustained.  The witness may not offer retrospectively 
    formed opinions.                                                     
    45:20–23:  The objection is sustained.  Same.                        
    46:5–9:  The objection is sustained.  Same.                          
    46:16–18:  The objection is sustained.  The witness cannot opine outside the scope 
    of his treatment of plaintiff and may not offer retrospectively formed opinions. 
    47:5–48:3:  The objection is sustained.  Same.                       
    48:22–49:5:  The objection is sustained.  Same.                      
    56:8–13:  The objection is sustained.  Same.                         
    56:8–57:22:  The objection is overruled.  The witness has sufficient knowledge to 
    give the answer.  Either he or physician’s assistants working under his supervision 
    reviewed the discharge plan (Defendant’s Exh. 8, p. 1).              
    57:23–58:24:  The objection is sustained.  The witness may not offer retrospectively 
    formed opinions.                                                     
IV.  CONCLUSION                                                           
    Beyond the issues previously discussed, the Court notes that if a party opens the door on 
direct examination for testimony that this order would otherwise preclude, cross-examination as 
to that issue will be permitted.                                          
     Therefore, it is 
     ORDERED that 

     1.  Defendant’s motions in limine (Dkt. No. 124) are GRANTED in part and DENIED in 
        part; and 
     2.  Plaintiffs motions in limine (Dkt. Nos. 127 & 140) are GRANTED in part and 
        DENIED in part. 

     IT ISSO ORDERED. 

Dated: October 9, 2025 
                                                                 .       ¢      
     Utica, New York 
                                     Anthony J. Brindisj 
                                     U.S. District Judg 

                                    □□□