UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK 

UPSOLVE, INC., and 
REV.  JOHN UDO-OKON, 
                        Plaintiffs,                 No. 22-cv-627 (PAC) 
                  Vv.                              ORDER 
LETITIA JAMES, in her official capacity as 
Attorney General of the State of New York, 
                        Defendant. 

      Erwin Rosenberg has moved for reconsideration of the Court’s Order denying his motion 
for permissive intervention.  See ECF No. 76.  “The standard for granting such a motion is strict, 
and reconsideration will generally be denied unless  the moving party can point to controlling 
decisions or data that the court overlooked—matters, in other words, that might reasonably be 
expected to alter the conclusion reached by the court.” Shrader v. CSX Transp., Inc., 70 F.3d 255, 
257 (2d Cir. 1995). 
      As  the Court previously  noted, permissive intervention lies within the Court’s “broad 
discretion,” AT&T Corp. y. Sprint Corp., 407 F.3d 560, 561 (2d Cir. 2005), and in exercising that 
discretion, the Court “must consider whether the intervention will unduly delay or prejudice the 
adjudication of the original parties’ rights,” Fed. R. Civ. P. 24(b)(3).  Rosenberg has identified no 
controlling decisions or data that have altered this discretionary standard. 
      Accordingly, the Court continues to exercise this discretion to deny Rosenberg’s motion to 
intervene.  Rosenberg simply disagrees with the Court’s prediction that his facial challenge to the 
licensing regime at issue would fail on the merits.  See Opinion & Order, ECF No. 68 at 17 n.6. 
That disagreement does not answer the permissive intervention question:  whether considering 

Rosenberg’s challenge——even if meritorious—would delay the proceedings, confuse the issues, or 
prejudice the original parties’ rights.  And as the Court has already concluded, intervention would 
create these problems.  Rosenberg (who is a disbarred lawyer) is not similarly situated to Plaintiffs 
(who are non-lawyers working for a non-profit)—a critical distinction supporting the Court’s 
decision to issue a preliminary injunction in favor of Plaintiffs.  While Rosenberg is free to assert 
his claim in a standalone lawsuit, he will not be permitted to intervene in this case.  Therefore, his 
motion for reconsideration is DENIED. 
      The Clerk of Court is respectfully directed to close the motion at ECF Number 76. 

 Dated: New York, New York               SO ORDERED 
      J                                              
       une 27, 2022                        feud A Cag 
                                       HONORABLE PAUL A. CROTTY 
                                       United States District  Judge

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK 

UPSOLVE, INC., and 
REV. JOHN UDO-OKON, 
                        Plaintiffs,                 No. 22-cv-627 (PAC) 
                  Vv.                              ORDER 
LETITIA JAMES, in her official capacity as 
Attorney General of the State of New York, 
                        Defendant. 

      Erwin Rosenberg has moved pro se for permissive intervention in this case.  See ECF Nos. 
63 (original motion); 64 (amended motion).  Plaintiffs oppose Rosenberg’s motion.  SeeECF     
65.  Permissive intervention lies within the Court's “broad discretion,” AT&T Corp.  v.  Sprint 
Corp., 407 F.3d 560, 561 (2d Cir. 2005), and in exercising that discretion, the Court “must consider 
whether the intervention will unduly delay or prejudice the adjudication of the original parties’ 
rights,” Fed. R. Civ. P. 24(b)(3). 
     For the reasons stated in the Court’s Opinion granting Plaintiffs’ motion for a preliminary 
injunction, Rosenberg seeks much broader relief than Plaintiffs, and is not similarly situated.  See 
ECF No. 68 at 17 n.6.  His intervention would deeply complicate the issues presented and delay 
the proceedings.  Therefore, his motion to intervene is DENIED. 
     The Clerk of Court is respectfully directed to close the motion at ECF Numbers 63 and 64. 

Dated: New York, New York               SO ORDERED 
      May 25, 2022                      Sod i  boty 
                                       HONORABLE PAUL A, CROTTY 
                                       United States District  Judge

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                                              
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                                             
UPSOLVE, INC., and                                                       
REV. JOHN UDO-OKON,                                                      
                    Plaintiffs,         No. 22-cv-627 (PAC)              
               v.                       OPINION & ORDER                  
LETITIA JAMES, in her official capacity as                               
Attorney General of the State of New York,                               
                    Defendant.                                           
    “The orderly functioning of our judicial system and the protection of our citizens require 

that legal advice should be offered only by those who possess the requisite qualifications and 
authorization for the practice of law.  At the same time, one of the most fundamental principles of 
our system of government prohibits any restraint on a citizen’s right to disseminate his views on 
important public issues.”  Dacey v. New York Cty. Lawyers’ Ass’n, 423 F.2d 188, 189 (2d Cir. 
1969).  Sometimes these two principles conflict, and one must yield to the other. 
    This case exemplifies that conflict.  Plaintiffs—a non-profit organization and a non-lawyer 
individual—seek to encroach upon a small part of what has heretofore been the exclusive domain 
of members of the Bar.  Plaintiffs have crafted a program that would train non-lawyers to give 
legal advice to low-income New Yorkers who face debt collection actions.  Specifically, Plaintiffs 

want to help those New Yorkers fill out checkboxes on a one-page answer form provided by the 
State, in the hopes that more people will avoid defaulting outright in such actions.  The legal advice 
would be free and confined to helping clients complete the State’s one-page form. 
    Plaintiffs’ proposal faces one problem: by giving legal advice as non-lawyers, their 
activities would constitute the unauthorized practice of law (“UPL”) under several New York 
statutes.  They risk being sued by the Defendant in this case, the New York State Attorney General.  
Thus, Plaintiffs seek an injunction that prevents the Attorney General from enforcing the UPL 
rules against them.                                                       
    The Court concludes a preliminary injunction is warranted.  The UPL rules cannot be 
applied to Plaintiffs’ program because the First Amendment protects their legal advice as speech, 

and the UPL rules are not narrowly tailored to satisfy strict scrutiny in this context.  Further, the 
balance of equities favors an injunction because Plaintiffs’ program would help alleviate an 
avalanche of unanswered debt collection cases, while mitigating the risk of consumer or ethical 
harm.  And enjoining enforcement against Plaintiffs alone, whose activities are carefully limited 
to out-of-court advice, will not threaten the overall regulatory exclusivity of the legal profession. 
                         BACKGROUND                                      
I.   Debt Collection Actions in New York State                            
    Debt collection actions are extremely common in New York.  By one estimate, they 
comprise approximately a quarter of all lawsuits in the State’s court system.  See Compl., ECF 
No. 1, at ¶ 18.                                                           

    These debt collection actions have been the subject of commentary and regulatory reform.  
Many of these lawsuits are viewed as “clearly meritless,” where the defendants sued do not actually 
owe the amount claimed, or any amount at all.  See id. ¶ 21.1  Nonetheless, everyone agrees the 
vast majority of New Yorkers default when faced with debt collection actions.  Plaintiffs provide 
estimates of the default rate that range from over 70% to up to 90%.  See id. ¶ 19. 

                                                                         
1 Quoting The Legal Aid Society et al., Debt Deception: How Debt Buyers Abuse the Legal System 
to  Prey  on  Lower-Income  New  Yorkers,  8–10,  26  n.91  (May  2010),  
https://www.neweconomynyc.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/DEBT_DECEPTION_FINAL_ 
WEB-new-logo.pdf.                                                         
    Three  such  New  Yorkers  have  submitted  declarations  describing  their  own  default 
judgments.  All three were sued on consumer debts such as credit card expenses, medical bills, or 
auto loans.  See Evertsen Decl., ECF No. 7-7, at ¶ 9; Jurado Decl., ECF No. 7-8, at ¶ 17; Lepre 
Decl., ECF No. 7-9, at ¶ 6.  However, none of them received notice they were being sued, so they 
all defaulted.  See Evertsen Decl. at ¶¶ 12–14; Jurado Decl. at ¶¶ 14–15; Lepre Decl. at ¶¶ 9–11.  

They  subsequently  faced  default  judgments—and  collateral  consequences  including  wage 
garnishment, lowered credit scores, and bankruptcy—because they had failed to answer the 
lawsuits against them.  See Evertsen Decl. at ¶ 17; Jurado Decl. at ¶¶ 18, 24; Lepre Decl. at ¶¶ 14, 
17, 22.                                                                   
    Since at least 2015, New York has responded to this debt collection problem by providing 
a one-page answer form that defendants can download, complete, and submit in their cases.  See 
Compl. ¶¶ 34–35; id. Ex. A, ECF No. 1-1 (the “State-Provided Answer Form”).  The form includes 
checkboxes allowing a defendant to assert affirmative defenses, such as, “I did not receive a copy 
of the Summons and Complaint,” “I had no business dealings with Plaintiff (Plaintiff lacks 

standing),” or “Unconscionability (the contract is unfair).”  See State-Provided Answer Form at 2.  
A defendant can submit a notarized copy of the State-Provided Answer Form themselves, i.e., 
pro se.                                                                   
II.  Plaintiffs and their AJM Program                                     
    Plaintiff Upsolve, Inc. is a non-profit organization that seeks to “ensure that all Americans 
can access their legal rights.”  Compl. ¶ 3.  The organization “hope[s] to improve public faith in 
the court system by ensuring that all defendants rich and poor can have their day in court, courts 
can decide more cases on their merits, and plaintiffs cannot secure default judgments on meritless 
claims simply due to defendants’ inability to vindicate their rights.”  Id. ¶ 56.  More specifically, 
Upsolve seeks “to provide free, narrowly circumscribed legal advice to low-income New Yorkers 
to ensure that they can understand how to respond to the debt collection lawsuits against them and 
help reduce wrongful deprivation of property and the lasting harm it can cause.”  Id. 
    To  that  end,  Upsolve  has  “designed,  crafted,  and  obtained  funding  to  implement  a 
program—the American Justice Movement (‘AJM’)—to train professionals who are not lawyers 

to provide free legal advice on whether and how to respond to a debt collection lawsuit.”  Id.  
Upsolve has not yet implemented the AJM program.  See id. ¶ 92.           
    Under the AJM program, volunteer trainees—referred to as “Justice Advocates”—would 
use a training guide to help clients complete the State-Provided Answer Form.  See Compl. Ex. B, 
ECF No. 1-2 (the “Training Guide”).  The Training Guide provides several steps for a Justice 
Advocate to follow when counseling a client.  Those steps include: (1) determining whether the 
client could benefit from their advice; (2) confirming the limited scope of representation with the 
client; (3) advising the client whether it is in their best interest to answer the lawsuit against them; 
(4) advising the client on how to fill out the answer’s 24 checkboxes based on the client’s answers 

to a series of questions; and (5) advising the client on how and where to file and serve the answer 
themselves.  See Training Guide at ECF pagination 5–13.  Upsolve designed the Training Guide 
with the help of lawyers and law professors who have experience in debt collection practice.  See 
Lhewa Decl., ECF No. 7-5; Foohey Decl., ECF No. 7-6.                      
    The Training Guide also limits the scope of legal assistance provided.  Justice Advocates 
must sign an affidavit attesting that the advice they provide will be free of charge.  They promise 
to abide by New York’s Rules of Professional Conduct regarding client conflicts of interest, 
confidentiality, and informed consent.  And they promise to refer clients to lawyer organizations 
if those client’s needs exceed the scope of the advice authorized by the Training Guide.  See 
Training Guide at ECF pagination 3–4, 15.  If Justice Advocates violate the Training Guide’s rules, 
their membership in the AJM program will be terminated.  They are also warned they could be 
prosecuted for the unauthorized practice of law or other consumer-protection laws if they violate 
the AJM program’s rules.  See id. at 4.                                   
    One such Justice Advocate would be Reverend Udo-Okon, the other plaintiff in this case.  

Reverend Udo-Okon is a pastor in the South Bronx.  See Udo-Okon Decl., ECF No. 7-2, at ¶ 3.  
He is not a lawyer, but would like to help members of his community who frequently come to him 
with their legal problems, including debt collection lawsuits.  See id. at ¶¶ 11, 13.  Reverend Udo-
Okon “would welcome the opportunity to be trained by the American Justice Movement,” and 
“would be willing to comply with the relevant ethical obligations, including confidentiality and 
conflict-of-interest protections, for the individuals seeking [his] advice.”  See id. at ¶ 23.  He 
declares that his advice would be free to those who receive it.  See id.  Reverend Udo-Okon has 
gathered signatures from dozens of his constituents who say they would be willing to receive free 
legal advice from him.  See id. Ex. 2A, ECF Nos. 7-3, 7-4.                

III.  New York’s UPL Statutes                                             
    New York makes it civilly and criminally punishable for someone who is not admitted to 
a State Bar Association to engage in the “unlawful practice of law.”  See N.Y. Jud. Law §§ 476-a, 
478, 484, 485.  A court may also hold a non-lawyer who practices law in civil or criminal contempt. 
See id. §§ 750, 753.  The Attorney General is authorized to sue “any person, partnership, 
corporation, or association” who engages in the unauthorized practice of law.  Id. § 476-a. 
    Defining the “practice of law,” however, is an elusive endeavor.  New York courts have 
held that one clear category “involves the rendering of legal advice and opinions directed to 
particular clients.”  Matter of Rowe, 80 N.Y.2d 336, 341–42 (1992).  Others include “appearing in 
court and holding oneself out to be a lawyer.”  El Gemayel v. Seaman, 72 N.Y.2d 701, 706 (1988).  
By contrast, giving generalized advice to the public—where judgment is not exercised on behalf 
of a particular client—is not considered the practice of law.  See Rowe, 80 N.Y.2d at 342; El 
Gemayel, 72 N.Y.2d at 706.                                                

    In this case, both sides agree that Justice Advocates in the AJM program would be 
“practicing law” in New York.  Justice Advocates would give clients advice on how to complete 
an answer form based on those clients’ individual circumstances; those clients would then file their 
answers in court.  See, e.g., Sussman v. Grado, 746 N.Y.S.2d 548, 552–53 (Dist. Ct. Nassau Cty. 
2002) (paralegal who used independent judgment to help a client fill out a form, without attorney 
supervision, engaged in the unauthorized practice of law).  The UPL rules therefore apply to 
Plaintiffs’ activities.                                                   
    The question, then, is whether the UPL rules are constitutional in that application. 
                           ANALYSIS                                      
IV.  Subject Matter Jurisdiction                                          

    A.   Plaintiffs have Standing to Seek Injunctive Relief              
    The Court must first assess the threshold issue of Article III standing.  Here, even though 
no one has yet sought to enforce the UPL rules against them, Plaintiffs have established standing. 
    “[I]n order to seek injunctive relief, a plaintiff must show the three familiar elements of 
standing: injury in fact, causation, and redressability.”  Cacchillo v. Insmed, Inc., 638 F.3d 401, 
404 (2d Cir. 2011) (citing Summers v. Earth Island Inst., 555 U.S. 488 (2009)).  At the preliminary 
injunction stage, “a plaintiff cannot rest on such mere allegations, as would be appropriate at the 
pleading stage but must set forth by affidavit or other evidence specific facts” supporting the three 
standing elements.  Cacchillo, 638 F.3d at 404 (cleaned up) (quoting Lujan v. Defenders of 
Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 561 (1992)).2                                     
    Plaintiffs have not provided any legal advice would expose them to prosecution under the 
UPL rules, raising questions as to the “injury in fact” element of Article III standing.  Yet such 
pre-enforcement challenges are regularly entertained by federal courts.  Where a plaintiff asserts 

injury based on the threat of prosecution, that plaintiff need not “expose himself to liability before 
bringing suit to challenge the basis for the threat—for example, the constitutionality of a law 
threatened to be enforced.”  MedImmune, Inc. v. Genentech, Inc., 549 U.S. 118, 128–29 (2007) 
(collecting cases).  Plaintiffs here could face civil or criminal prosecution under the UPL rules by 
the Attorney General.                                                     
    In a pre-enforcement challenge, “[c]ourts are generally ‘willing to presume that the 
government will enforce the law as long as the relevant statute is recent and not moribund.’”  
Cayuga Nation v. Tanner, 824 F.3d 321, 331 (2d Cir. 2016) (quoting Hedges v. Obama, 724 F.3d 
170, 197 (2d Cir. 2013)).  This presumption “sets a low threshold and is quite forgiving to plaintiffs 

seeking such preenforcement review,” Cayuga Nation, 824 F.3d at 331 (quoting Hedges, 724 F.3d 
at 197), especially when First Amendment rights are at issue.  See Nat’l Org. for Marriage, Inc. v. 
Walsh, 714 F.3d 682, 689 (2d Cir. 2013).                                  
    New York’s UPL rules are hardly moribund; they are frequently enforced against lawyers 
and non-lawyers alike.  See, e.g., Spiegel v. Ahearn, No. 101251/2016, 2018 WL 4743366, at *4 
(Sup. Ct. N.Y. Cty. 2018) (non-lawyer engaged in the unauthorized practice of law “by discussing 
                                                                         
2 “An evidentiary hearing is not required . . . when the disputed facts are amenable to complete 
resolution on a paper record” or a part “waive[s] its right to an evidentiary hearing.”  Charette v. 
Town of Oyster Bay, 159 F.3d 749, 755 (2d Cir. 1998).  Plaintiffs have submitted several affidavits 
in support of their motion; the Court has also heard oral argument from both sides.  Accordingly, 
the Court reviews this motion on a paper record without an evidentiary hearing. 
Defendants’ legal problems with them and advising them what they needed to do to resolve those 
problems”); People v. Jakubowitz, 710 N.Y.S.2d 844, 845 (Sup. Ct. Bronx Cty. 2000) (criminal 
charges under UPL rules against disbarred attorney).  Just a few months ago, the Attorney General 
charged a non-lawyer in Buffalo for allegedly posing as an attorney and representing clients at 
legal proceedings.3  That non-lawyer faces a possible felony under the UPL rules. 

    To be sure, the Attorney General has not announced an intention to prosecute the Plaintiffs 
for implementing the AJM program.  But as discussed above, Plaintiffs’ activities would clearly 
run afoul of the UPL rules.  See Tweed-New Haven Airport Auth. v. Tong, 930 F.3d 65, 71 (2d Cir. 
2019).  Moreover, the Attorney General declined to disavow enforcement against Plaintiffs at oral 
argument.4  See Walsh, 714 F.3d at 691 (political non-profit had pre-enforcement standing, despite 
Government’s suggestion that it might not enforce a statute, when that statute “clearly applie[d]” 
to  non-profit’s  activities,  and  Government  had  conceded  at  oral  argument  that  it  regulated 
thousands of other political committees); Vermont Right to Life Comm., Inc. v. Sorrell, 221 F.3d 

                                                                         
3 See Press Release: Attorney General James and State Police Superintendent Bruen Announce 
Arrest  of  Phony  Attorney,  NEW  YORK  STATE  ATT’Y  GENERAL,  Mar.  9,  2022, 
https://ag.ny.gov/press-release/2022/attorney-general-james-and-state-police-superintendent-
bruen-announce-arrest.                                                    
4 See Oral Argument Tr., ECF No. 66, at 27:5–17:                          

         THE COURT:  Let me interrupt you.  Is there any doubt that the  
         Attorney General would enforce this law against the plaintiffs? 

         MR. LAWSON:  It’s hard to make a determination on that question 
         simply because it’s a hypothetical question, and the issue of the 
         unauthorized practice of law is a fact-based inquiry that depends on 
         what actually happens in a given circumstance.                  

         THE COURT:  You think this is not the practice of law?          

         MR. LAWSON:  For the purpose of this motion, your Honor, the    
         state is not disputing that the conduct that they state that they would 
         participate in would likely constitute unauthorized practice of law. 
376, 383 (2d Cir. 2000) (noting “there is nothing that prevents the State from changing its mind” 
about enforcement).  The Attorney General has not rebutted the presumption of enforcement.  
    Plaintiffs have also buttressed their standing by showing exactly how they would violate 
the UPL rules.  See Wembley, Inc. v. Superba Cravats, Inc., 315 F.2d 87, 90 (2d Cir. 1963) (“Major 
stress should be placed on the ‘definite’ intention of the plaintiff to take ‘immediate’ action to 

utilize its potential and this intention should be ‘evident’ from the preparatory steps outlined in its 
complaint.”).  Upsolve has provided a fully fleshed-out Training Guide.  It has identified willing 
Justice Advocate trainees (such as Reverend Udo-Okon) and willing clients (such as the signatories 
to the Reverend’s petition) that could implement that Training Guide immediately.  Plaintiffs’ 
injury is thus sufficiently concrete to meet Article III’s requirements.  
    With injury-in-fact established, the causation and redressability elements of standing are 
easily satisfied in this case.  As to causation, Plaintiffs have alleged that the only thing preventing 
them from acting is the threat of UPL enforcement.  See Udo-Okon Decl. ¶¶ 17–18, 21 (“One such 
religious leader in the South Bronx was accused of practicing law without a license because he 

was trying to help members of his community out with their legal issues.  I fear that I would face 
the same consequences if I tried to help members of my own community out with their debt 
collection lawsuits.”).  And relatedly, an injunction against enforcement of the UPL rules would 
remove the threat to Plaintiffs’ planned activities, satisfying the redressability requirement. 
    B.   Plaintiffs’ Challenge is As-Applied                             
    The nature of Plaintiffs’ pre-enforcement challenge presents another threshold question: 
whether the Court should treat that challenge as one that is “facial” or “as-applied.”  A facial 
challenge would seek to declare New York’s UPL rules unconstitutional for everyone, while an 
as-applied challenge only seeks to hold those rules unconstitutional as to Plaintiffs’ own activities. 
    “Facial challenges to overly broad statutes are allowed not primarily for the benefit of the 
litigant, but for the benefit of society—to prevent the statute from chilling the First Amendment 
rights of other parties not before the court.”  Sec’y of State of Md. v. Joseph H. Munson Co., 467 
U.S.  947,  958  (1984).    Given  their  breadth,  facial  challenges  are  highly  disfavored.    See 

Washington State Grange v. Washington State Republican Party, 552 U.S. 442, 450 (2008); 
accord Dickerson v. Napolitano, 604 F.3d 732, 741 (2d Cir. 2010).         
    Plaintiffs characterize their suit as an as-applied challenge—they do not seek to strike down 
the UPL rules whole cloth—and the Attorney General does not argue otherwise.  Yet the pre-
enforcement timing of Plaintiffs’ lawsuit unsettles their conclusion.  After all, how is the Court to 
resolve the application of the UPL rules to Plaintiffs if they have not yet violated anything? 
    Some Second Circuit precedent would seem to suggest that Plaintiff’s lawsuit must be 
construed as a facial challenge.  In Jacoby & Meyers, LLP v. Presiding Justices of the First, 
Second, Third & Fourth Departments, non-lawyer plaintiffs who wanted to invest in law firms 
sued before taking any action to violate the UPL rules.  852 F.3d 178, 191 (2d Cir. 2017).  The 

Second  Circuit  noted  that  the  plaintiffs’  suit  “constitute[d]  a  facial,  rather  than  as-applied 
challenge” because they had brought a “pre-enforcement appeal before they have been charged 
with any violation of law . . . .”  Id. (quoting N.Y.S. Rifle & Pistol Ass’n, Inc. v. Cuomo, 804 F.3d 
242, 265 (2d Cir. 2015) (internal quotation marks omitted)).  Likewise here, because Plaintiffs 
have not been charged with violating the UPL rules, Jacoby & Meyers would suggest their action 
should be construed as a facial challenge.                                
    The Supreme Court, however, has eschewed any such bright line rule.  It has permitted 
pre-enforcement, as-applied challenges under the First Amendment.  See Holder v. Humanitarian 
Law Project, 561 U.S. 1, 14–16 (2010); Milavetz, Gallop & Milavetz, P.A. v. United States, 559 
U.S. 229, 234, 248–49 (2010).                                             
    While these two lines of authority are admittedly in “some tension,” Geller v. Cuomo, 476 
F. Supp. 3d 1, 17 (S.D.N.Y. 2020), it is more sensible to frame Plaintiffs’ challenge as an as-
applied one.  Adjudicating their claims will not extend relief to non-parties outside of their 

organization, as the specifics of Plaintiffs’ legal advice can be adjudicated on the factual basis of 
AJM Training Guide.  They seek to allow members of a specific group to give legal advice about 
a specific legal topic—debt collection cases—with specific parameters about how those members 
would go about giving that advice.  This analysis does not require adjudication of every possible 
application of the UPL rules based on hypothetical facts about other groups of non-lawyers.  See 
United States v. Salerno, 481 U.S. 739, 745 (1987) (on a facial challenge, “the challenger must 
establish that no set of circumstances exists under which the [statute] would be valid”). 
    Moreover, there is no tension at all surrounding the federal courts’ general preference for 
as-applied challenges.  As-applied challenges serve the foundational interest of judicial restraint.  

They  allow  for  incremental  decisions,  based  on  actual  cases  or  controversies,  about  the 
constitutionality of our laws.  See Kane v. De Blasio, 19 F.4th 152, 174 (2d Cir. 2021). 
    The Court shall therefore examine the constitutionality of the UPL rules as applied to 
Plaintiffs alone.                                                         
    This framing carries important consequences.  A facial challenge would impose a heavy 
burden on Plaintiffs to prove the UPL rules lack a “plainly legitimate sweep,” Washington State 
Grange, 552 U.S. at 449 (citation and quotation marks omitted)—an especially trying task 
considering that the UPL rules are one of the cornerstones of the modern practice of law in New 
York State.  Instead, with an as-applied challenge, Plaintiffs need not challenge the legitimacy of 
the UPL rules in the abstract; they need only address the UPL rules with respect to their own 
activities.  An as-applied challenge also guarantees that any relief would be narrow, affecting only 
the Plaintiffs and not the entire universe of non-lawyers.  See Brockett v. Spokane Arcades, Inc., 
472 U.S. 491, 502 (1985) (noting that “a federal court should not extend its invalidation of a statute 
further than necessary to dispose of the case before it”).                

    With the scope of Plaintiffs’ challenge to the UPL rules made clear, the Court turns to the 
merits.                                                                   
V.   MOTION FOR PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION                                    
    Plaintiffs seek a preliminary injunction that prevents the Attorney General from enforcing 
the UPL rules against them for implementing the AJM program.              
    A.   Legal Standard                                                  
    A preliminary injunction is an “extraordinary and drastic remedy” that is “never awarded 
as of right.”  Munaf v. Geren, 553 U.S. 674, 689–90 (2008).  To obtain this remedy, Plaintiffs must 
demonstrate three factors.  Where, as here, “a preliminary injunction will affect government action 

taken in the public interest pursuant to a statute or regulatory scheme,” the party seeking the 
preliminary injunction must demonstrate “(1) irreparable harm absent injunctive relief, (2) a 
likelihood of success on the merits, and (3) public interest weighing in favor of granting the 
injunction.”  Agudath Israel of Am. v. Cuomo, 983 F.3d 620, 631 (2d Cir. 2020) (citation and 
quotation marks omitted).  More generally, “[t]he movant also must show that ‘the balance of 
equities tips in his [or her] favor.’”  Yang v. Kosinski, 960 F.3d 119, 127 (2d Cir. 2020) (quoting 
Winter v. Nat. Res. Def. Council, Inc., 555 U.S. 7, 20 (2008)).           
    “To warrant a preliminary injunction, Plaintiffs need not show that there is a likelihood of 
success on the merits of all of their claims for relief.  Rather, Plaintiffs must show a likelihood of 
success on the merits of at least one of their claims.”  L.V.M. v. Lloyd, 318 F. Supp. 3d 601, 618 
(S.D.N.Y. 2018) (alterations and quotation marks omitted).                
    One wrinkle: Plaintiffs in this case seek an injunction that alters the status quo by allowing 
them to give legal advice for the first time.  Thus, Plaintiffs seek a “mandatory” injunction (which 
alters the status quo) rather than a “prohibitory” injunction (which maintains the status quo).  See 

Kosinski, 960 F.3d at 127.  For a “mandatory” injunction, Plaintiffs must also: (1) make a “strong 
showing” of irreparable harm, and (2) demonstrate a “clear or substantial likelihood of success on 
the merits.”  Id. (citations omitted).  Because the Court concludes Plaintiffs would prevail under 
either the “mandatory” or “prohibitory” standard, it does not distinguish between the two for 
purposes of this Opinion.  See id.                                        
    B.   Likelihood of Success on the Merits                             
    Much rises and falls on the likelihood of Plaintiffs’ success on the merits.  “Because the 
deprivation of First Amendment rights is an irreparable harm, in First Amendment cases ‘the 
likelihood of success on the merits is the dominant, if not the dispositive, factor’” in granting a 

preliminary injunction.  Agudath Israel, 983 F.3d at 637 (quoting Walsh, 733 F.3d at 488). 
    “It  is  fundamental  that  the  First  Amendment  ‘was  fashioned  to  assure  unfettered 
interchange of ideas for the bringing about of political and social changes desired by the people.’”  
Legal Servs. Corp. v. Velazquez, 531 U.S. 533, 548 (2001) (quoting New York Times Co. v. 
Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254, 269 (1964)).                                      
    Plaintiffs advance two theories under the First Amendment.  First, they claim the UPL rules 
infringe on their right to associate with potential clients and access the courts.  Second, they claim 
the UPL rules infringe on their right to give legal advice under the Free Speech Clause.  Although 
their first theory likely lacks merit, their second theory is likely to succeed on the merits. 
              i)   Right of Association Claim                            
    The Court first addresses, and dismisses, Plaintiffs’ associational theory.  Plaintiffs allege 
the UPL rules unconstitutionally prevent them, and their clients, from accessing the courts and 
expressing their political beliefs.  They argue that debt collection lawsuits affect poor and minority 
Americans more than other groups, and that by responding to those lawsuits, they can express their 

beliefs about every New Yorker’s right to be heard in court.  See Compl. ¶ 56. 
    Two threads of Supreme Court precedent are often invoked in this associational context.  
The first line of cases involves non-profits that seek to advocate politically through litigation.  In 
NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. 415 (1963), the NAACP sought to recruit clients to battle racial 
segregation in court.  However, a state statute had prevented organizations like the NAACP from 
using attorneys to represent third-party clients.  Id. at 423–24.  The Supreme Court held that 
NAACP’s efforts were “modes of expression and association protected by the First and Fourteenth 
Amendments . . . .”  Id. at 428–49.  The Court emphasized that “no monetary stakes [were] 
involved” in the NAACP’s mission, such that “there [was] no danger that the attorney [would] 

desert or subvert the paramount interests of his client to enrich himself or an outside sponsor.”  Id. 
at  443–44.    The  NAACP’s  attorney  advocacy  was  therefore  a  “mode[]  of  expression  and 
association protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments.”  Id. at 428–49. 
    Button’s rationale was echoed in In re Primus, 436 U.S. 412 (1978).  In Primus, the 
Supreme Court struck down a law that prevented the ACLU from soliciting a client who had 
received an allegedly unconstitutional sterilization.  Id. at 422.  Again, the Court emphasized the 
organization’s non-financial motives by contrasting the ACLU’s activities from those in another 
case decided the same day, Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Ass’n, 436 U.S. 447, 458 (1978), which 
upheld a state law barring a lawyer from solicitating a client in-person for paid representation.  
Primus, 436 at 422.  Although the Primus Court concluded the state’s interests may be stronger in 
circumstances where a commercial transaction is proposed, they were not sufficiently tailored in 
application to organizations such as the ACLU.  Id.                       
    The second relevant line of cases involves lawyers who seek to represent union members.  
See United Transp. Union v. Michigan, 401 U.S. 576 (1971); United Mine Workers of Am., Dist. 

12 v. Ill. State Bar Ass’n, 389 U.S. 217 (1967); Brotherhood of R. R. Trainmen v. Virginia ex rel. 
Va. State Bar, 377 U.S. 1 (1964).  In those cases, the Supreme Court has held the First Amendment 
protected union members’ right to “associate with each other to obtain counsel and further their 
litigation ends, and to the union as a proxy for the workers in their exercise of associational rights.”  
Jacoby & Meyers, 852 F.3d at 185.  States therefore could not “prevent efforts of a union to provide 
its members practical and economical access to courts to press work-related personal injury 
claims” by framing laws “in the guise of regulating the practice of law.”  Board of Education v. 
Nyquist, 590 F.2d 1241, 1244 (2d Cir. 1979).                              
    The “common thread” of these two lines of cases is the principle that “collective activity 

undertaken to obtain meaningful access to the courts is a fundamental right within the protection 
of the First Amendment.”  United Transp., 401 U.S. at 585.  And the cases have clearly 
differentiated between “activities of lawyers acting in a for-profit setting and those acting in a not-
for-profit context, advocating political causes in which the attorneys themselves share . . . .”  
Jacoby & Meyers, 852 F.3d at 188.  Hence, Plaintiffs’ non-profit status holds some superficial 
appeal in this action.                                                    
    But the cases share another common thread which cuts against Plaintiffs: in each one, 
“clients and attorneys [sought] each other out to pursue litigation.”  Id. at 185 (emphasis added).  
Here, by contrast, non-lawyers would seek out clients.  Accordingly, both the non-profit and the 
union lines of caselaw are fundamentally distinguishable: neither confronted a non-lawyer’s 
purported associational right to represent a client.  In that respect, no precedent, binding or 
otherwise, appears to support Plaintiffs’ position.                       
    This Court doubts, moreover, that the rationale of Button and Primus extends so far as to 
justify non-lawyer legal advice merely because doing so would express a political belief.  The 

lawyers in those non-profit cases sought to vindicate constitutional rights, such as equal protection 
against discriminatory laws, because such causes “implicate[d] expressive values” for both the 
lawyers and their clients.  Id. at 185–86.  Here, Plaintiffs would express their belief in ending 
cycles of poverty by assisting their clients in debt collection cases.  But the only constitutional 
right they seek to vindicate is their clients’ right to access the courts.5  Promoting access to the 
courts—a right shared by every client—would allow any non-lawyer, so long as they do not charge 
a fee, to bootstrap a right to practice law.  See id. at 187 (“We are not aware of any judicial 
recognition of such an interest, however, when it comes to the lawyer’s generic act of pursuing 
litigation on behalf of any client.”).  Clients in any type of civil lawsuit would thus enjoy the right 

to full non-lawyer representation.  The Court declines to endorse this broad associational theory to 
warrant a preliminary injunction.                                         
              ii)  Free Speech Claim                                     
    Plaintiffs’ stronger theory is based on their own right to free speech.  On this second claim, 
they have demonstrated a likelihood of success on the merits.             
    At the outset, the Court underscores that an abstract “right to practice law” is not at issue 
in this narrow challenge.  The Court does not question the facial validity of New York’s UPL rules 
                                                                         
5 Given that Plaintiffs have not included any clients in their lawsuit, they also risk creating a third-
party standing problem by asserting constitutional rights on behalf of hypothetical clients.  See 
Jacoby & Meyers, 852 F.3d at 189 n.7.                                     
to distinguish between lawyers and non-lawyers in most settings, and to regulate all sorts of non-
lawyer behavior.6  Instead, the issue here is a narrow one: whether the First Amendment protects 
the precise legal advice that Plaintiffs seek to provide, in the precise setting in which they intend 
to provide it.  The Court holds that it does.                             
                   (1)  Plaintiffs’ Legal Advice is Content-Based Speech 

    Plaintiffs’ claim hinges on whether the act of giving legal advice should be conceptualized 
as  conduct  or  speech.    The  two  concepts  often  blur,  given  that  “the  practice  of  law  has 
communicative and non-communicative aspects.”  Capital Associated Indus., Inc. v. Stein, 922 
F.3d 198, 208 (4th Cir. 2019).  But “[w]hile drawing the line between speech and conduct can be 
difficult, [the Supreme] Court’s precedents have long drawn it, and the line is long familiar to the 
bar.”  Nat’l Inst. of Fam. & Life Advocs. v. Becerra, 138 S. Ct. 2361, 2373 (2018) (citations and 
quotation marks omitted) (“NIFLA”).                                       
    The distinction between speech and conduct matters because it determines the level of 
scrutiny that the Court must apply.  On the one hand, for regulations of professional conduct that 

incidentally involve speech, courts apply intermediate scrutiny.  See id. at 2372 (citing Ohralik, 
436 U.S. at 456–57 (remarking that where “speech is an essential but subordinate component” of 
a  transaction,  “[w]hile  this  does  not  remove  the  speech  from  the  protection  of  the  First 
Amendment” altogether, “it lowers the level of appropriate judicial scrutiny”)).  On the other hand, 
                                                                         
6 A recent motion by a non-party illustrates the limits of the Court’s holding.  A non-lawyer, Erwin 
Rosenberg, has moved for permissive intervention in this case.  See ECF No. 64.  Rosenberg was 
apparently disbarred but remains “interested in practicing law in New York courts.”  Id. at 1.  He 
pushes the Court to address the broad question of “whether the New York lawyer licensing and 
disciplinry [sic] system violates the First Amendment.”  Id.  In other words, Rosenberg seeks to 
assert a facial challenge—a “general constitutional attack”—on New York’s ability to “admit, 
suspend and/or disbar a lawyer.”  Id. at 5.  Rosenberg’s challenge to the UPL rules is nothing like 
the Plaintiffs’ challenge here, and the Court can confidently predict his challenge to the State’s 
licensing scheme would fall within the myriad of cases upholding UPL statutes generally. 
a regulation invites strict scrutiny when it “‘targets speech based on its communicative content’—
that is, if it ‘applies to particular speech because of the topic discussed or the idea or message 
expressed.’”  City of Austin v. Reagan Nat’l Advert. of Austin, LLC, 142 S. Ct. 1464, 1471 (2022) 
(alteration omitted) (quoting Reed v. Town of Gilbert, 576 U.S. 155, 163 (2015)). 
    There is no doubt: lower courts have overwhelmingly concluded that UPL statutes regulate 

professional “conduct” and merely burden a non-lawyer’s speech incidentally.  These authorities, 
however, have never addressed the narrow—and novel—question the AJM program presents here. 
    For example, many UPL cases have focused on specific “conduct” that non-lawyers sought 
to undertake.  Non-lawyers have been excluded from “drafting” pleadings and “filing” legal 
documents.7  Conduct could also include “representing” clients in a courtroom or proceeding.8  
These conduct-focused cases are inapposite, as Plaintiffs do not seek to do any of these activities.  
The AJM program does not allow Justice Advocates to file pleadings, represent clients in court, or 
handle client funds.  Their counsel is limited to out-of-court verbal advice. 
    Other distinguishable cases have addressed facial challenges to UPL rules.  Rather than 

focusing on discrete types of speech that non-lawyers could provide, these cases have concluded 
that the abstract practice of law does not implicate First Amendment scrutiny as a general matter.9  
                                                                         
7 See, e.g., People v. Shell, 148 P.3d 162, 170 (Colo. 2006); State v. Niska, 380 N.W.2d 646, 648 
(N.D. 1986); Fla. Bar v. Furman, 376 So. 2d 378, 379 (Fla. 1979).         
8 See, e.g., Montana Supreme Ct. Comm’n on Unauthorized Practice of Law v. O’Neil, 147 P.3d 
200, 204 (Mont. 2006); Adams v. Am. Bar Ass’n, 400 F. Supp. 219, 225 (E.D. Pa. 1975); Turner 
v. Am. Bar Ass’n, 407 F. Supp. 451, 477 (N.D. Tex. 1975).                 
9 See, e.g., Monroe v. Horwitch, 820 F. Supp. 682, 683–86 (D. Conn. 1993), aff’d, 19 F.3d 9 (2d 
Cir. 1994) (table); Lawline v. Am. Bar Ass’n, 956 F.2d 1378, 1386 (7th Cir. 1992) (but noting an 
as-applied challenge could implicate “many activities which lawyers routinely engage in which 
are protected by the First Amendment and which could not be constitutionally prohibited to 
laypersons”); McDermott v. Langevin, 587 B.R. 173, 184–85 (Bankr. N.D. Ga. 2018); Howard v. 
Superior Ct., 52 Cal. App. 3d 722, 724 (1975).                            
That approach would be overinclusive here, given Plaintiffs bring an as-applied challenge about 
spoken advice they would give to clients.  Moreover, these cases have been called into serious 
doubt by NIFLA,10 which applied intermediate scrutiny to professional conduct regulations at the 
very least—not rational basis review, or indeed complete lack of First Amendment scrutiny, as the 
Attorney General proposes.  See NIFLA, 138 S. Ct. at 2375; see also Stein, 922 F.3d at 208–09 

(concluding, after NIFLA, that intermediate scrutiny applied to a UPL rule that generally regulated 
conduct, and noting the rule at issue did not “target the communicative aspects of practicing law, 
such as the advice lawyers may give to clients”).                         
    Overall, none of these cases have dealt with (1) an as-applied challenge to a UPL statute 
where (2) a plaintiff sought to give pure verbal speech.  That combination is novel.  And where 
both these elements are present, modern Supreme Court doctrine has foreclosed a reductive 


                                                                         
10 NIFLA provided an example of a professional conduct regulation that only incidentally burdened 
speech from Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833, 884 (1992).  In 
Casey, doctors were required to provide information to a woman deciding whether to proceed with 
an  abortion—a  so-called  “informed-consent”  provision—before  performing  that  procedure.  
NIFLA, 138 S. Ct. at 2373.  Although the informed-consent provision affected what licensed 
medical providers were required to say in specific contexts with their patients, the NIFLA Court 
emphasized the regulation only “incidentally burden[ed]” speech in the context of professional 
conduct: before a medical procedure.  Id.  By contrast, the state regulation in NIFLA required 
organizations offering pregnancy services (but not provide abortion procedures) to provide notice 
about abortion options in the state, untethered from any larger conduct-dominated context; in other 
words, it “regulate[d] speech as speech,” not speech as an auxiliary to a professional procedure.  
Id. at 2374; see also EMW Women’s Surgical Ctr., P.S.C. v. Beshear, 920 F.3d 421, 447 (6th Cir. 
2019) (Donald, J., dissenting).                                           
The professional conduct in Casey—and its “incidental” effect on speech—is far removed from a 
UPL regime that, as applied to these Plaintiffs, only affects speech: barring legal advice by non-
lawyers.  Just as the Court distinguished the notice requirement in NIFLA from the informed-
consent provision in Casey, here the bar on legal advice “is not tied to a procedure at all.  It applies 
to all interactions between [a non-lawyer] and [their] clients, regardless of whether [legal advice] 
is ever sought, offered, or performed.”  NIFLA, 138 S. Ct. at 2373.       
approach where laws that are generally directed at conduct would avoid First Amendment scrutiny 
when applied to a particular plaintiff’s speech.                          
    Instead, for as-applied challenges, the Court in Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project 
adopted a “refined” approach to the speech/conduct problem.  561 U.S. at 28.  The plaintiffs in 
Humanitarian Law challenged a statute that forbade providing “material support” to designated 

terrorist organizations, which included “expert advice or assistance” that was “derived from 
scientific, technical or other specialized knowledge.”  Id. at 12–13.  The government, like the 
Attorney General here, argued that the law permissibly regulated the conduct of providing material 
support, and that any incidental effect on plaintiffs’ own speech was not actionable under the First 
Amendment.  The Court disagreed with the government, and in so doing, set forth the proper 
analytical framework for this case.                                       
    The Humanitarian Law Court set forth the following rule: for as-applied challenges, courts 
ask whether plaintiffs’ own speech is directly or incidentally burdened, not whether the statute on 
its face imposes an incidental burden on speech.  See id. at 27–28 (rejecting government’s 

argument that “material support statute” “should nonetheless receive intermediate scrutiny because 
it generally functions as a regulation of conduct”).  Thus, if a “generally applicable law” is 
“directed” at a plaintiff “because of what his speech communicated”—that is, the communication 
violates the statute “because of the offensive content of his particular message,” then that law 
directly burdens plaintiff’s speech.  Id. at 28; see also Otto v. City of Boca Raton, Fla., 981 F.3d 
854, 865 (11th Cir. 2020) (“[T]there is a real difference between laws directed at conduct sweeping 
up incidental speech on the one hand and laws that directly regulate speech on the other.  The 
government cannot regulate speech by relabeling it as conduct.”).  At that point, the burden is no 
longer “incidental.”                                                      
    Although it diverged on other issues, the Humanitarian Law Court unanimously concluded 
the giving of expert advice was speech, not conduct.  On its face, the statute was “described as 
directed at conduct” of providing material support, “but as applied to plaintiffs the conduct 
triggering coverage under the statute consists of communicating a message.”  Humanitarian Law, 
561 U.S. at 28.  Although the Court diverged on other issues, it was unanimous on this point.  See 

id. at 61 (Breyer, J., dissenting) (“[T]he majority properly rejects the Government’s argument that 
the plaintiffs’ speech-related activities amount to ‘conduct’ and should be reviewed as such.”).  To 
show how expert advice was speech, the Court pointed to the content-based distinctions in the 
material support prohibition:                                             
         Plaintiffs want to speak to [designated terrorist organizations], and 
         whether they may do so under [the material support prohibition] 
         depends on what they say.  If plaintiffs’ speech to those groups 
         imparts a “specific skill” or communicates advice derived from  
         “specialized  knowledge”—for  example,  training  on  the  use  of 
         international law or advice on petitioning the United Nations—then 
         it is barred.  On the other hand, plaintiffs’ speech is not barred if it 
         imparts only general or unspecialized knowledge.                
Id. at 27 (majority opinion) (citation omitted).                          
    That logic applies seamlessly to the statute at issue here.  On its face, New York’s UPL 
rules “may be described as directed at conduct” of acting as a lawyer, “but as applied to plaintiffs 
the conduct triggering coverage under the statute consists of communicating a message.”  Id. at 
28.  In other words, Plaintiffs’ violation of the law “depends on what they say” to their clients.  Id. 
at 27.  If Justice Advocates provide non-legal advice about a client’s debt problem (by, for 
example, advising that person to cut down on spending to pay off debts), the UPL rules do not 
apply.  But if they provide legal advice about how to respond to the client’s debt problem (by 
advising that person on how they should fill out the State-Provided Answer Form, based on their 
specific circumstances), the UPL rules forbid their speech.  Their actions are therefore, by 
definition, content-based speech.                                         
    Concluding that Plaintiffs’ legal advice is content-based speech is not only in line with 
modern First Amendment authority; it is also the intuitive result.  At its core, Plaintiffs’ action is 
indisputably speech, not conduct.  “If speaking to clients is not speech, the world is truly upside 

down.”  City of Boca Raton, 981 F.3d at 866.  The Court shall not ignore common sense by 
construing Plaintiffs’ legal advice as something it is not.               
    The UPL rules are also speaker-based, and “laws favoring some speakers over others 
demand strict scrutiny when the legislature’s speaker preference reflects a content preference.”  
Barr v. Am. Ass’n of Pol. Consultants, Inc., 140 S. Ct. 2335, 2347 (2020) (quoting Reed, 576 U.S. 
at 170).  Importantly, as in Barr, there is such a content preference, because the UPL rules do not 
merely focus on the identity of the speaker, but also “focus[] on whether the [speaker] is speaking 
about a particular topic.” Id. (emphasis added); see Sorrell v. IMS Health Inc., 564 U.S. 552, 563–
64 (2011) (holding that a state statute restricting a particular set of speakers’ ability to express a 

particular type of message was content-based).  Therefore, because the UPL rules “‘do[] not simply 
have an effect on speech, but [are] directed at certain content and [are] aimed at particular 
speakers’” they are content-based.  Barr, 140 S. Ct. at 2347 (alterations added) (quoting Sorrell, 
564 U.S. at 567).                                                         
                   (2)  Plaintiffs’ Speech is Analyzed No Differently under a 
                        Licensing Regime                                 
    Lurking under this speech/conduct muddle is the fact that the UPL rules constitute a 
licensing regime for lawyers.  Some courts have concluded that generally applicable professional 
licensing regimes—and the speech that they burden—are outside of the First Amendment.  But as 
will be explained, the “characterization of the licensing requirement as a professional regulation 
cannot lower that bar.  The Supreme Court has consistently rejected attempts to set aside the 
dangers of content-based speech regulation in professional settings.”  Brokamp v. D.C., No. CV 
20-3574 (TJK), 2022 WL 681205, at *1 (D.D.C. Mar. 7, 2022) (alterations omitted) (quoting City 
of Boca Raton, 981 F.3d at 861).                                          
    Courts endorsing the theory that licensing requirements can permissibly burden speech 

have relied on Justice White’s concurrence in Lowe v. SEC, 472 U.S. 181 (1985).  In that case, 
which involved an investment advisor who wrote an advice column in securities newsletters, 
Justice White drew a distinction between advice offered to the general public versus advice 
personalized  to  a  particular  client  to  infer  that  licensing  regimes  do  not  pose  major  First 
Amendment problems.  He began by defining what he believed “the practice of a profession” to 
be: where someone “takes the affairs of a client personally in hand and purports to exercise 
judgment  on  behalf  of  the  client  in  the  light  of  the  client’s  individual  needs  and 
circumstances . . . .”  Id. at 232 (White, J., concurring).  So far, so good.  Lowe, after all, was about 
whether the investment advisor had given general or client-based speech.  But Justice White then 

went further to reach a constitutional conclusion about licensing regimes.  He stated that, so long 
as a “personal nexus” exists between a professional and client, the government can “enact[] 
generally applicable licensing provisions limiting the class of persons who may practice the 
profession” without infringing on anyone’s freedom of speech.  Id. (White, J., concurring).11 
    Some courts have extended Justice White’s proposed “personal nexus” test to legal advice 
offered to clients by unlicensed laymen.  See, e.g., Rowe, 80 N.Y.2d at 342 (“The courts may, in 
the public interest, prohibit attorneys from practicing law and that prohibition may incidentally 
                                                                         
11 Even Justice White did not believe licensing regimes should receive no First Amendment 
scrutiny; in a later dissent, he proposed they should receive rational basis review.  See Thornburgh 
v. Am. College of Obstetricians & Gynecologists, 476 U.S. 747, 802 (1986) (White, J., dissenting). 
affect the attorney’s constitutional right to free speech by forbidding the giving of advice to 
clients.”).  More generally, some circuits—but, notably, not the Second Circuit—have crystallized 
Justice White’s concurrence to uphold other types of licensing regimes that impact speech.  See, 
e.g., Del Castillo v. Sec’y, Fla. Dep’t of Health, 26 F.4th 1214, 1221 (11th Cir. 2022) (rejecting a 
non-licensed person’s free speech bid to give dietary advice).            

    Despite these cases, this Court is not persuaded by Justice White’s concurrence in Lowe, 
and by extension, the assumption that licensing regimes can bar non-professionals’ speech without 
any constitutional consequence.  Justice White’s discussion of licensing—joined only by two other 
Justices—was unquestionably dicta, and has never been referenced by the Supreme Court or the 
Second Circuit.  See Commodity Futures Trading Comm’n v. Vartuli, 228 F.3d 94, 107 (2d Cir. 
2000) (“Lowe’s holding was based on the Investment Advisers Act, not the Constitution.  It 
therefore does not provide a framework for analysis of the constitutional issues raised on this 
appeal.”).  The Court is not bound by the Lowe concurrence.               
    Moreover, the Supreme Court recently undermined Justice White’s theory that licensing 

requirements are somehow sui generis under the First Amendment merely because they target 
professionals.  Under Humanitarian Law, the mere fact that speech “derive[s] from ‘specialized 
knowledge’” does not remove it from the First Amendment’s ambit.  561 U.S. at 27.  And NIFLA 
rejected  a  lower-court  doctrine—a  so-called  “professional  speech”  doctrine—that  closely 
resembled Justice White’s concurrence in Lowe.  Some circuits had “define[d] ‘professionals’ as 
individuals who provide personalized services to clients and who are subject to ‘a generally 
applicable licensing and regulatory regime.’”  NIFLA, 138 S. Ct. at 2371 (citation omitted); see 
also id. at 2375 (“All that is required to make something a ‘profession,’ according to these courts, 
is that it involves personalized services and requires a professional license from the State.”).  But 
the Supreme Court in NIFLA noted that such regimes would “give[] the States unfettered power to 
reduce a group’s First Amendment rights by simply imposing a licensing requirement,” an 
untenable result.  Id. at 2375.  NIFLA therefore undermines the premise that licensing regimes can 
somehow transform pure speech and evade First Amendment scrutiny altogether.12 
    To be sure, there are special categories of pure speech that the government can regulate 

without scrutiny.  But legal advice does not appear to be one of them.  Those special categories—
for example, defamation, incitement, fraud, and obscenity—are tightly limited in number.  See 
NIFLA, 138 S. Ct. at 2372 (noting that the Supreme Court “has been especially reluctant to exempt 
a category of speech from the normal prohibition on content-based restrictions”) (alteration and 
citation omitted).  To qualify, a type of speech must be historically rooted in a tradition of 
regulation going back to the Founding.  See NIFLA, 138 S. Ct. at 2372; United States v. Stevens, 
559 U.S. 460, 468–71 (2010).                                              
    Legal advice lacks that clear history of regulation.  In the colonial period, courts “adopted 
UPL rules to control those who appeared before them,” but “nonlawyers were free to engage in a 

wide range of activities which would be considered UPL today, such as giving legal advice and 
preparing legal documents.”  Derek A. Denckla, Nonlawyers and the Unauthorized Practice of 
Law: An Overview of the Legal and Ethical Parameters, 67 FORDHAM L. REV. 2581, 2583 (1999).  
That practice continued unabated through the post-colonial and Reconstruction eras.  See Robert 
Kry, The “Watchman for Truth”: Professional Licensing and the First Amendment, 23 SEATTLE 
UNIV. L. REV. 885, 954–57 (2000).  “Simply put, the historical practices at the time of the 
ratification of the First and Fourteenth Amendments show that the rendering of personalized advice 
                                                                         
12 Although the Court in NIFLA did “not foreclose the possibility” that “some . . . reason exists” 
to afford professional speech some special First Amendment exemption, 138 S. Ct. at 2375, it has 
not identified any such reason.                                           
to specific clients was not one of the ‘well-defined and narrowly limited classes of speech, the 
prevention and punishment of which has never been thought to raise any constitutional problem.’” 
Id. at 957 (quoting Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315 U.S. 568, 571–72 (1942)).  Without an 
established historical basis to do so, courts today cannot treat pure legal advice as a sui generis 
category of speech that is immune to constitutional scrutiny.             

                   (3)  Strict Scrutiny Applies                          
    As a content-based regulation of Plaintiffs’ speech, the UPL rules trigger strict scrutiny.  
See, e.g., Barr, 140 S. Ct. at 2347.  Strict scrutiny “requires the Government to prove that the 
restriction furthers a compelling interest and is narrowly tailored to achieve that interest.”  Reed, 
576 U.S. at 171 (citation omitted).  The Government has the burden of proving the UPL rules 
satisfy  strict  scrutiny.    See  id.  at  163  (noting  that  content-based  laws  are  “presumptively 
unconstitutional”).    This  is  a  demanding—though  not  insurmountable—standard  for  the 
Government to meet.  See Williams-Yulee v. Fla. Bar, 575 U.S. 433, 444 (2015) (providing 
examples, including Humanitarian Law, where content-based statutes have been upheld against 

strict scrutiny).                                                         
    “A court applying strict scrutiny must ensure that a compelling interest supports each 
application of a statute restricting speech.”  Fed. Election Comm’n v. Wisconsin Right To Life, 
Inc., 551 U.S. 449, 478 (2007) (emphasis in original).  Likewise, “[i]f a less restrictive alternative 
would serve the Government’s purpose, the legislature must use that alternative.”  United States 
v. Playboy Ent. Grp., Inc., 529 U.S. 803, 813 (2000); accord Green Party of Conn. v. Garfield, 
616 F.3d 189, 209 (2d Cir. 2010).  Thus, the State must demonstrate that it has a compelling interest 
in criminalizing Plaintiffs’ AJM program, and that it has no less restrictive alternative than the 
UPL rules that it could use to regulate that program.                     
    In the abstract, New York undoubtedly has a compelling interest in enforcing the UPL 
rules.  In general, “[s]tates have a compelling interest in the practice of professions within their 
boundaries, and that as part of their power to protect the public health, safety, and other valid 
interests they have broad power to establish standards for licensing practitioners and regulating the 
practice of professions.”  Goldfarb v. Virginia State Bar, 421 U.S. 773, 792 (1975).  In the context 

of the UPL rules, New York has a “well-established interest in regulating attorney conduct and in 
maintaining ethical behavior and independence among the members of the legal profession.”  
Jacoby & Meyers, 852 F.3d at 191.  Such rules are designed to protect the public “from the dangers 
of legal representation and advice given by persons not trained, examined and licensed for such 
work, whether they be laymen or lawyers from other jurisdictions.”  El Gemayel, 72 N.Y.2d at 705 
(citation and quotation marks omitted).  Beyond the consumer-projection justification, the State 
also has an interest the UPL rules’ promotion of judicial integrity and efficiency, as lawyers are 
“officers of the courts.”  Goldfarb, 421 U.S. at 792.  Given these compelling interests, it is little 
wonder that the UPL rules have consistently withstood legal challenges.   

    Yet these justifications for the UPL rules appear less compelling in the context of Plaintiffs’ 
specific, narrow mission.  Plaintiffs’ program has anticipated many of the State’s consumer 
protection concerns and erected preventative limits on what Justice Advocates may do.  Justice 
Advocates  must  attend  a  training—designed  by  lawyers—and  be  approved  under  the  AJM 
program criteria.13  They must abide by State ethical guidelines for assisting clients, including for 
                                                                         
13 Relying on Plaintiffs’ limited legal training would logically protect clients’ interests better than 
trusting those clients to complete their own forms pro se, with no legal training at all.  And there 
is some common-sense truth to the notion that a non-lawyer “who has handled 50 debt collection 
matters, for example, would likely provide better representation than a patent lawyer who has 
never set foot in small claims court and last looked at a consumer contract issue when studying for 
the bar exam.”  Brief of Amicus Curiae Rebecca L. Sandefur, ECF No. 38-1, at 21 (footnote 
omitted).                                                                 
conflicts of interest and confidentiality.  They cannot make money at their clients’ expense.  They 
must refer clients to licensed lawyers if those clients’ needs exceed the scope of the Training 
Guide.  And they cannot appear in court or file documents, thus eliminating any risk of providing 
bad advice in more complex or adversarial settings.                       
    Nor does the UPL rules’ other emphasis on judicial integrity provide a compelling reason 

to ban Plaintiffs’ program.  To the contrary, courts typically depend on a complete and accurate 
presentation of a dispute through the adversarial process.  See Velazquez, 531 U.S. at 545; Penson 
v. Ohio, 488 U.S. 75, 84 (1988).  By implementing the AJM program, more New Yorkers will 
respond to their lawsuits and begin that adversarial process, rather than default entirely.  And 
answering those lawsuits with Plaintiffs’ help does not risk additional legal error once their clients 
are through the courthouse doors; at that point, those clients will either retain a licensed lawyer 
(perhaps using a pro bono organization) or go on to represent themselves pro se (as anticipated by 
the State’s do-it-yourself checkbox form).                                
    One group of amici nonetheless maintain the real cause of defaults in debt collection cases 

is “sewer service,” or the lack of adequate service on defendants.  See Brief of Amici Curiae 
Consumer Law Experts et al., ECF No. 57, at 11–13.  “Sewer service” occurs when debt collector 
plaintiffs serve process on invalid addresses or on nonexistent cohabitants so that defendants never 
receive notice of the lawsuits against them in the first place.  See id.  Because New Yorkers are 
well-past the point of answering the complaint once they learn they have defaulted, these Amici 
argue, Plaintiffs’ program does not address any genuine legal problem.  See id.  After all, the three 
New Yorkers who filed declarations in this case had defaulted after failing to receive any notice. 
    “Sewer service” might be the primary cause of the debt collection problem, but Plaintiffs 
can still increase access to the courts without needing to provide a cure-all solution.  It seems 
unlikely that every defendant in debt collection cases will default because of “sewer service” alone.  
And even if “sewer service” were truly universal, Plaintiffs’ program has the potential to help even 
those clients who have defaulted.  The Training Guide instructs Justice Advocates that “[i]f the 
client has already had a default judgment entered against them, they may be able to have it vacated 
if they follow the directions” at a website link to another State-provided, do-it-yourself affidavit 

to vacate a default judgment.  Training Guide at ECF pagination 17.  Thus, Plaintiffs’ program, at 
the very least, would provide another link in the informational chain to help unaware defendants 
vacate defaults from “sewer service.”                                     
    A related objection contends Plaintiffs’ program will not be effective because licensed 
lawyers—through pro bono organizations and courthouse programs—already assist low-income 
New Yorkers in debt collection cases, and do not turn away clients.  But again, Plaintiffs’ program 
does not need to reach every potential client to strengthen the judicial system.  As courts have 
acknowledged for decades, “the problems of indigents—although of the type for which an attorney 
has traditionally been consulted—are too immense to be solved solely by members of the bar.  The 

supply of lawyer manpower is not nearby large enough.”  Hackin v. Arizona, 389 U.S. 143, 146–
47 (1967) (Douglas, J., dissenting).  And when the State’s own forms encourage defendants to file 
their answers pro se, it seems clear that some New Yorkers lack the ability to fully access these 
lawyer services.                                                          
    Aside from its less-than-compelling interests, the State has failed to narrowly tailor the 
statute.  In fact, the UPL rules could hardly be broader: New York could implement less restrictive 
alternatives to blanket ban on all unauthorized legal advice.  The Training Guide’s disclaimers 
demonstrate how the State retains many tools to mitigate harmful speech in this arena.  See Bery 
v. City of New York, 97 F.3d 689, 698 (2d Cir. 1996) (ordinance not narrowly tailored when other 
sections of the city code “already achieve” the city’s goals “without such a drastic effect”).  As 
Justice Advocates are warned, the State has created tort remedies, including breach of fiduciary 
duty, that could apply to non-lawyers who harm their clients.  Justice Advocates are also warned 
that the State still forbids non-lawyers from holding themselves out as licensed lawyers to the 
public.  See N.Y. Jud. Law § 478 (“It shall be unlawful for any natural person . . . to hold himself 

or herself out to the public as being entitled to practice law . . . .”); id. § 475-a (making it a Class 
E felony to do so while causing “material damage to the impairment of a legal right”).  To further 
these ends, the State could, for example, tailor the UPL rules by requiring Justice Advocates to 
fully disclose their qualifications and experience, such that clients can make an informed decision 
about the quality of the legal advice they would receive.  Or the State might impose targeted 
trainings or educational standards on Plaintiffs short of a full Bar certification.  These types of 
measures would allow Plaintiffs to dispense a circumscribed level of speech while still protecting 
the public from dishonest or untrained legal assistance.                  
    The Court recognizes that legislative developments in this area remain ongoing.  States are 

exploring ways to regulate non-lawyers who provide legal advice to clients.  See, e.g., Brief of 
Amicus Curiae Rebecca L. Sandefur, ECF No. 38-1, at 17–18 (providing examples of non-lawyer 
assistance in states including Wisconsin, Washington, Arizona, and California, and in the federal 
government).  These developments suggest a narrower tailoring of New York’s UPL rules is 
feasible.  See McCullen v. Coakley, 573 U.S. 464, 494 (2014) (strict scrutiny not satisfied where 
state had failed to show “it considered different methods that other jurisdictions have found 
effective”).  But the Court does not short-circuit the State’s legislative process merely because it 
references these developments.  It is not the Court’s role to decide how to more narrowly tailor the 
UPL rules, or to ask whether allowing non-lawyers to give legal advice is good policy.  Even if 
there might be plenty of legitimate reasons to ban such advice outright,  
         The First Amendment’s guarantee of free speech does not extend  
         only to categories of speech that survive an ad hoc balancing of 
         relative social costs and benefits.  The First Amendment itself 
         reflects a judgment by the American people that the benefits of its 
         restrictions  on  the  Government  outweigh  the  costs.    Our 
         Constitution forecloses any attempt to revise that judgment simply 
         on the basis that some speech is not worth it.                  
Stevens, 559 U.S. at 470.                                                 
    Because the UPL rules likely fail strict scrutiny as applied to the AJM program, Plaintiffs’ 
have shown a likelihood of success on the merits of their First Amendment free speech claim.  
With the “dominant, if not the dispositive, factor” weighing in favor of an injunction, Agudath 
Israel, 983 F.3d at 637, the Court turns briefly to the remaining factors. 
    C.   Irreparable Injury                                              
    Plaintiffs’ irreparable injury also favors an injunction.  “The loss of First Amendment 
freedoms,  for  even  minimal  periods  of  time,  unquestionably  constitutes irreparable injury.”  
Roman Cath. Diocese of Brooklyn v. Cuomo, 141 S. Ct. 63, 67 (2020) (quoting Elrod v. Burns, 
427 U.S. 347, 373 (1976) (plurality opinion)).  Plaintiffs’ irreparable injury necessarily follows 
from the likelihood of their success on the merits on the free speech claim. 
    D.   Public Interest and Balance of Equities                         
    Finally,  the  balance  of  equities  and  the  public  interest  favor  allowing  Plaintiffs  to 
commence their legal program.  As for the public interest, the State “does not have an interest in 
the enforcement of an unconstitutional law.”  New York Progress & Prot. PAC v. Walsh, 733 F.3d 
483, 488 (2d Cir. 2013) (quoting ACLU v. Ashcroft, 322 F.3d 240, 247 (3d Cir. 2003)).  Rather, 
the Second Circuit has recognized that “securing First Amendment rights is in the public interest.”  
Walsh, 733 F.3d at 488.  And largely for the reasons provided in the strict scrutiny analysis, the 
balance of equities favors an injunction.                                 
                          *    *    *                                    
    Lawyers, as members of a “noble profession,” play a unique role in our society.  Mallard 
v. United States Dist. Ct. for the Southern Dist. of Iowa, 490 U.S. 296, 311 (1989) (Kennedy, J., 

concurring).  But Plaintiffs have designed a unique program of their own.  They have demonstrated 
a narrow exception, under the First Amendment, to New York’s UPL rules, and they will be 
allowed to implement that program without the threat of prosecution.      
                           INJUNCTIVE RELIEF                             
    Having concluded that a preliminary injunction shall issue, the Court must fashion relief 
that is “narrowly tailored” to this as-applied challenge.  Patsy’s Ital. Res., Inc. v. Banas, 658 F.3d 
254, 272 (2d Cir. 2011).                                                  
    Accordingly, during the pendency of this action, the Attorney General and her officers, 
agents, and employees, and all other persons acting in concert with them, are enjoined from taking 

any of the following actions:                                             
    1.  Enforcing the UPL rules against Plaintiffs or any Justice Advocates, to the extent 
      Plaintiffs or Justice Advocates offer legal advice without a license to do so, to clients 
      as contemplated in the AJM Training Guide.  Of course, the Attorney General is not 
      enjoined from enforcing the UPL rules to the extent Plaintiffs or any Justice Advocates 
      provide legal advice beyond the limits of the AJM Training Guide.  
    2.  Enforcing the UPL rules against any clients of the AJM program who solicit or aid 
      Plaintiffs or any Justice Advocates who provide legal advice as contemplated by the 
      AJM Training Guide.                                                
     3.  Enforcing the UPL rules against the AJM program’s legal advisors, Tashi Lhewa and 
        Pamela Foohey, for having assisted in creating the Training Guide. 
                                CONCLUSION 
     Plaintiffs’ motion for a preliminary injunction is GRANTED.  The parties are directed to 
jointly submit a Civil Case Management Plan in accordance with the Court’s Individual Practices 
by June 3, 2022. 
      The Clerk of Court is respectfully directed to close the motion at ECF Number 5, 

Dated: New York, New York               SO ORDERED 
      May  2  ¥, 2022                            AipAb  1 
                                       HONORABLE PAUL A. CROTTY 
                                       United States District  Judge 

                                      33