UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                           

               DISTRICT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE                             


Brandon Velez,                                                            
Plaintiff                                                            

v.                                 Case No. 23-cv-44-SM-TSM          
                                   Opinion No. 2025 DNH 061          

Rachael Eutzy, Erik Slocum,                                               
Casey Seigle, and                                                         
The City of Manchester, N.H.,                                             
Defendants                                                           



                       O R D E R                                     


Early in the morning of February 22, 2021, the plaintiff,            
Brandon Velez, was the subject of a lawful motor vehicle stop in          
Manchester, New Hampshire.  That stop was conducted by                    
Manchester police officers Rachael Eutzy and Erik Slocum.  After          
a brief interaction with Velez (during which he was evasive and           
confrontational), Officer Eutzy instructed him to get out of his          
vehicle.  Velez refused and then resisted her efforts to extract          
him from the car.  A brief but fairly violent struggle ensued as          
Officers Eutzy and Slocum forcibly removed Velez from the car.            
The third individual defendant, Sergeant Seigle, arrived at the           
scene immediately before the officers successfully secured Velez          
in custody.                                                               
During the course of his struggle against the officers,              
Velez was Tasered twice and struck in the chest.  He suffered a           
small cut on his left hand (perhaps from the effort to handcuff           

him) and some minor scrapes and bruising - his booking photos             
show a bruise on his forehead and a small abrasion under his              
left eye - but no lasting physical injuries.  The details of the          
traffic stop, the brief struggle, and Velez’s eventual arrest             
are discussed in detail in the court’s prior order.  See Order            
on Summary Judgment (document no. 26) (“Velez I”).                        

Following his arrest, Velez was charged with disobeying a            
police officer and resisting arrest (both misdemeanors) and               
operating at night without a headlight (a violation).  Velez              
pled guilty to the traffic violation and the misdemeanor charges          
were dropped.  He then filed this civil suit in which he claimed          

that he had been the victim of excessive force, battery,                  
wrongful arrest, and false imprisonment.  In total, he brought            
seven federal claims and four state common law claims against             
the City of Manchester and the three police officers involved in          
his arrest.                                                               

In Velez I, the court concluded that: (a) the motor vehicle          
stop was lawful and defendants had probable cause to stop,                
detain, and arrest Velez; (b) none of the individual officers             
employed constitutionally excessive force against Velez; (c) the          
level of force used by the officers to extract Velez from the             
vehicle (and to prevent him from possibly accessing anything              

that could be used as a weapon) was reasonable and escalated in           
measured form; and (d) under the circumstances, the police                
officers were legally justified in their use of reasonable force          
and, therefore, did not commit common law assault or battery.             
In light of those conclusions (and others), the court granted             
defendants’ motion for summary judgment on all claims raised in           
Velez’s complaint.  Velez appealed the court’s decision to the            
Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, see Velez v. Eutzy, et            
al., Case No. 24-1594, and the court heard oral argument on               
January 8, 2025.  A decision on the merits is currently pending.          

Invoking the provisions of New Hampshire Revised Statutes            

Annotated (“RSA”) 627:1-a, defendants now seek an award of                
attorney’s fees for work related to their successful defense              
against Velez’s four state common law claims of assault and               
battery, false imprisonment, and failure to train.  For the               
reasons discussed, that motion is denied.                                 

                      Discussion                                     
The court necessarily begins with the following                      
observation: defendants are under the mistaken impression that            
the court “has already granted Defendants’ request for                    
attorney’s fees.”  Defendants’ Reply Memorandum (document no.             
37) at 2 (emphasis in original).  That is incorrect.  Earlier in          

this case, three motions were pending: defendants’ motion for a           
bill of costs and a separate a motion for attorney’s fees; and            
plaintiff’s motion for an extension of time to object to those            
motions.  In resolving those motions, the court first denied              
(without prejudice) defendants’ motion for costs as premature.            
Then, turning to plaintiff’s motion to extend time, the court             
ruled:                                                                    

Plaintiff’s motion to extend the time by which it must               
object to the motions (document no. 33) is granted in                
part and denied in part.  As to defendants’ premature                
bill of costs, it is denied as moot.  As to                          
defendants’ motion for attorney’s fees, it [i.e.,                    
plaintiff’s motion to extend time] is granted.  If,                  
after conferring with each other in good faith, the                  
parties are unable to agree upon a fair, reasonable,                 
and just award of attorney’s fees to defendants,                     
plaintiff may file an objection [to defendants’ motion               
for fees] on or before July 24, 2024.                                


Order dated July 9, 2024 (document no. 34) at 2.  Plainly, then,          
defendants’ motion for attorney’s fees remains unresolved.                

Next, the court must consider whether it retains                     
jurisdiction to rule on defendants’ request for fees despite the          
pendency of Velez’s appeal.  It does.                                     
The black-letter rule that the filing of a notice of                 
appeal transfers authority over the case from the                    
trial court to the court of appeals derives from a                   
desire to prevent clashes between institutions that                  
occupy different tiers within the federal judicial                   
system.  Thus, the trial court may continue to                       
exercise a modicum of power over a case that is before               
the appellate court - but this power exists only in                  
those few situations in which the risk of an                         
intramural collision is small. . . ..                                

By its nature, any suggestion of shared jurisdiction                 
is sensitive and, thus, the administration of this                   
principle requires a delicate touch.  At most, shared                
jurisdiction flourishes in a circumscribed cluster of                
situations, the handling of which is not inconsistent                
with the prosecution of an appeal.  These situations                 
include the processing of such peripheral or ancillary               
aspects of the case as motions for counsel fees,                     
actions in aid of execution of a judgment that has                   
been appealed and not stayed, and orders relating to                 
procedures in aid of the appeal.                                     


United States v. Brooks, 145 F.3d 446, 456 (1st Cir. 1998)                
(emphasis supplied; citations and internal punctuation omitted).          
See generally Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(d)(2)(B) (governing the timing           
of a motion seeking an award of attorney’s fees).                         

Turning to the merits of defendants’ motion, the court               
notes that New Hampshire honors the traditional “American Rule”           
under which each party typically bears its own costs associated           
with litigation, including attorney’s fees.  Consequently, any            
award of attorney’s fee “must be grounded upon statutory                  
authorization, an agreement between the parties, or an                    
established exception to the rule that each party is responsible          
for paying his or her own counsel fees.”  Clipper Affiliates v.           
Checovich, 138 N.H. 271, 278 (1994).  Here, as noted above,               
plaintiffs seek a fee award pursuant to a statutory                       

authorization, specifically RSA 627:1-a.  That statute provides           
that:                                                                     

A person who uses force in self-protection or in the                 
protection of other persons pursuant to RSA 627:4, in                
the protection of premises and property pursuant                     
to RSA 627:7 and 627:8, in law enforcement pursuant                  
to RSA 627:5, or in the care or welfare of a minor                   
pursuant to RSA 627:6, is justified in using such                    
force and shall be immune from civil liability for                   
personal injuries sustained by a perpetrator which                   
were caused by the acts or omissions of the person as                
a result of the use of force.                                        

In a civil action initiated by or on behalf of a                     
perpetrator against the person, the court shall award                
the person reasonable attorney’s fees, and costs,                    
including but not limited to, expert witness fees,                   
court costs, and compensation for loss of income.                    


N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 627:1-a (emphasis supplied).  In turn,             
RSA 627-5 provides, in relevant part, that:                               

A law enforcement officer is justified in using non-                 
deadly force upon another person when and to the                     
extent that he reasonably believes it necessary to                   
effect an arrest or detention or to prevent the escape               
from custody of an arrested or detained person, unless               
he knows that the arrest or detention is illegal, or                 
to defend himself or a third person from what he                     
reasonably believes to be the imminent use of non-                   
deadly force encountered while attempting to effect                  
such an arrest or detention or while seeking to                      
prevent such an escape.                                              
RSA 627:5 I.  In short, then, if law enforcement officers use             
reasonable force to effect an arrest that they reasonably                 
believe is lawful, they are immune from civil liability.                  

Moreover, if they are subsequently sued for such conduct, they            
are entitled to recover reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in            
defending themselves.                                                     

The problem with defendants’ invocation of RSA 627:1-a, at           
least as it presents itself in this case, is this: the statute            
speaks exclusively to the ability of an individual “person” to            
recover attorney’s fees, not a municipality.  Typically,                  
however, in civil actions of this sort, the legal fees                    
associated with defending police officers’ conduct are borne by           
their municipal employers (or their insurance carriers).  Such            
was certainly the case here: the City of Manchester retained and          

compensated the attorneys who represented both the City and the           
individual officers.  See, e.g., Defense Counsel’s Invoice to             
City of Manchester (document no. 32-2).  So, those individual             
officers incurred no liability for attorney’s fees.  The City of          
Manchester is the true party in interest and it is the City that          
seeks to recover its attorney’s fees pursuant to RSA 627:1-a.             
But that statute does not specifically authorize municipalities           
to recover fees in the context of a case like this.                       
There are, to be sure, other situations in which the New             
Hampshire Legislature has authorized awards of attorney’s fees            
to municipal entities.  For example, RSA 676:17 provides that:            


In any legal action brought by a municipality to                     
enforce, by way of injunctive relief as provided by                  
RSA 676:15 or otherwise, any local ordinance, code or                
regulation adopted under this title, or to enforce any               
planning board, zoning board of adjustment or building               
code board of appeals decision made pursuant to this                 
title, or to seek the payment of any fine levied under               
paragraph I, the municipality shall recover its costs                
and reasonable attorney’s fees actually expended in                  
pursuing the legal action if it is found to be a                     
prevailing party in the action.                                      


N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 676:17 I (emphasis supplied).  See also            
RSA 12-G:14 II(3) (attorney’s fees recoverable by municipalities          
to cover costs associated with collecting real estate taxes from          
entities leasing property from the Pease Development Authority);          
RSA 80:88 (attorney’s fees recoverable by municipalities to               
cover the cost of preparing and filing petition to sell property          
acquired by tax deed); RSA 147:7-b V (attorney’s fees                     
recoverable by municipalities to cover costs incurred defending           
an order of nuisance abatement); and RSA 676:17-a IX (attorney’s          
fees recoverable by municipalities in litigation over cease and           
desist orders).                                                           

Undeniably, then, the New Hampshire legislature understands          
how to draft statutory language when it wishes to make clear the          
circumstances under which a municipality may recover attorney’s           
fees in civil litigation.  Its omission of any such language              
from the statute at issue is, then, noteworthy.                           


Indeed, says Velez, the statute’s use of the word “person”           
and its omission of any reference to “municipalities” is both             
meaningful and dispositive of defendants’ motion.  As Velez sees          
things, because RSA 627:1-a does not authorize an award of                
attorney’s fees to a municipality, and because defendants do not          
invoke any other statute or common law principle in support of            
their fee request, that request must necessarily be denied.  In           
response, defendants assert that nothing in the statute                   
specifically requires a “person” to actually incur an obligation          
to pay attorney’s fees in order to be entitled to an award of             
attorney’s fees.  See Defendants’ Reply Memorandum at 3.                  


The New Hampshire Supreme Court has yet to address this              
issue (and neither party has moved this court to certify the              
question to the New Hampshire Supreme Court).  Resolving the              
parties’ conflicting interpretations of RSA 627:1-a requires the          
court to employ New Hampshire’s rules of statutory construction,          
which are clear and well-established:                                     

The interpretation of a statute raises a question of                 
law, which we review de novo. . . . We first look to                 
the language of the statute itself, and, if possible,                
construe that language according to its plain and                    
ordinary meaning.                                                    

We interpret legislative intent from the statute as                  
written and will not consider what the legislature                   
might have said or add language that the legislature                 
did not see fit to include.  Only when the statutory                 
language is ambiguous do we look to the legislative                  
history to aid in our interpretation.                                


State v. Williams, 174 N.H. 635, 640–41, 273 A.3d 394, 399                
(2021) (emphasis supplied; citations omitted).  See also State            
v. Pinault, 168 N.H. 28, 31 (2015) (“We interpret legislative             
intent from the statute as written and will not consider what             
the legislature might have said or add language it did not see            
fit to include.  Finally, we interpret a statute in the context           
of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation.”)                   
(emphasis supplied; citation omitted).                                    

Here, several factors counsel in favor of interpreting the           
word “person,” as used in RSA 627:1-a, to mean an individual              
human being – not that individual’s employer or the insurance             
company that actually incurred the obligation to pay the                  
attorney’s fees associated with defending the person’s conduct.           
First, and perhaps most importantly, in the “overall statutory            
scheme” of RSA ch. 627, Pinault, 168 N.H. at 31, the word                 
“person” is not ambiguous.  Chapter 627 is entitled                       
“justification” and addresses the general principle that,                 
“Conduct which is justifiable under this chapter constitutes a            
defense to any offense.  The fact that such conduct is                    
justifiable shall constitute a complete defense to any civil              

action based on such conduct.”  RSA 627:1 (“General Rule”).  The          
statute goes on to describe the circumstances under which                 
individuals (including, but not limited to, law enforcement               
officers) may lawfully employ both non-deadly and deadly force            
in a variety of situations (e.g., self defense; defense of                
another; defense of premises; during the course of law                    
enforcement; with respect to a minor ward, child, or student;             
and to prevent property theft).                                           

Because the statute as a whole focuses on the rights (and            
protections) afforded to individual citizens, it is not                   
surprising that the statue also speaks to an individual’s                 

immunity from civil suit and an individual’s entitlement to               
attorney’s fees.  For the same reasons, it is unsurprising that           
the statute does not mention the individual’s employer, or                
insurer, or subrogation rights.  The legislative focus appears            
to have been on making certain that individual citizens who               
reasonably employ either non-deadly or deadly force are                   
protected from civil suit and, if they incur costs and                    
attorney’s fees defending a civil suit, are afforded an                   
opportunity to recover those expenses.  In short, the statute’s           
focus is on the individual person, not his or her employer or             
insurer.                                                                  


Similarly, when the legislature amended chapter 627 in 2011          
by adding the section at issue – that is, 627:1-a - it did not            
use the words “employer,” or “municipality,” or “insurer,” or             
“subrogation.”  Consistent with the existing overall statutory            
scheme, the rights and protections afforded by that section               
apply only to “persons.”  The court must assume that the                  
legislature acted deliberately in choosing its words and this             
court cannot alter the meaning of the statute by adding language          
the legislature chose to exclude.  See, e.g., Williams, 174 N.H.          
at 640-41; Pinault, 168 N.H. at 31.                                       

When, in other contexts, the legislature intended to create          

a means for municipalities to recover attorney’s fees, it fully           
understood the language necessary to do so.  The absence of such          
language here implies that RSA 627:1-a was not intended to                
provide attorney’s fees to entities beyond those specifically             
mentioned: “persons” who have lawfully used force during the              
course of an encounter/altercation with another.  “To hold                
otherwise would not only contravene the statute’s plain                   
language, but also add language to the statute that the                   
legislature did not see fit to include.”  State v. Parr, 175              
N.H. 52, 58 (2022).  See also State v. Gunnip, 174 N.H. 778, 785          
(2022) (same).                                                            


As the party invoking the provisions of RSA 627:1-a,                 
defendants bear the burden of showing entitlement to fees under           
that statute.  Yet, their argument implies they believe that              
Velez must demonstrate that they are not entitled to a fee                
award.                                                                    

Plaintiff argues that a plain reading of RSA 627:1-a                 
requires that fees only be recovered by “natural                     
persons,” and because Officers Eutzy and Slocum “have                
[not] directly paid, or will be required to pay” the                 
attorney’s fees incurred in connection with the                      
defense of this action, Defendants are not entitled to               
attorney’s fees under the statute.  As an initial                    
matter, Plaintiff cites no case law supporting this                  
interpretation of the statute, and Defendants have                   
found none.                                                          


Defendants’ Reply Memorandum at 3.  Defendants then assert                
that:                                                                     

Put simply, RSA 627:1-a imposes no obligation on a law               
enforcement officer, or other person under the                       
statute, to pay the cost of his or her own attorney’s                
fees in order to recover the same if successful in a                 
civil action.  Furthermore, this Court does not need                 
to read into the statute language - or in this case a                
whole provision - which the New Hampshire legislature                
did not see fit to include.                                          

Plaintiff’s argument that defense or indemnification                 
precludes an award of attorney’s fees under RSA 627:1-a              
is not supported by the plain language of the statute,               
and is not grounds for denying an award of attorney’s                
fees to Defendants.                                                  


Id.  But, to borrow defendants’ language, put simply, the plain           
language of the statute only authorizes the court to award                
reasonable attorney’s fees to a “person” and here no individual           
person incurred any attorney’s fees.                                      

The court also notes the general rule that pro se litigants          
who owe no obligation to pay fees to an attorney, are not                 
typically entitled to an award of attorney’s fees.  See Emerson           
v. Town of Stratford, 139 N.H. 629, 632 (1995) (“This case also           
compels us to address the issue of whether a court may award the          
sanction of attorney’s fees to a pro se litigant who does not             
incur any obligation to pay for an attorney.  We are now                  
prepared to join the majority of jurisdictions that have                  
answered the question in the negative.”).  See also ATV Watch v.          
New Hampshire Dep’t of Transp., 161 N.H. 746, 764–65 (2011).              
Here, like the pro se litigant, the police officer defendants             
did not incur any obligation to pay for an attorney.                      
Consequently, given the precise and limited statutory language            
at issue, it is difficult to see how an award to those “persons”          
could be warranted in this case.                                          
Finally, because the New Hampshire Supreme Court has yet to          
definitively interpret the meaning of the word “person” as used           
in RSA 627:1-a (and because neither party seeks certification of          

the issue), this court is unwilling to adopt defendants’ novel            
and expansive interpretation of the plain language employed in            
that statute.  See generally Doe v. Trustees of Bos. Coll., 942           
F.3d 527, 535 (1st Cir. 2019) (“A litigant who chooses federal            
court over state court cannot expect this court to blaze new and          
unprecedented jurisprudential trails as to state law.”)                   
(citations and internal punctuation omitted); Halsey v. Fedcap            
Rehab. Servs., Inc., 95 F.4th 1, 10 (1st Cir. 2024) (“A federal           
court considering state law claims does not create new rules or           
significantly expand existing rules.  We leave those tasks to             
the state courts.  We are bound by the teachings of [the                  
State’s] highest court, and take care not to extend state law             

beyond its well-marked boundaries.  We presume that the                   
appellants, in choosing a federal rather than a state forum,              
were cognizant that it is not the role of a federal court under           
diversity jurisdiction to blaze new trails in state law.”)                
(citations and internal punctuation omitted).1                            


1    Velez originally filed this action in the Hillsborough               
County Superior Court, Northern Division.  But, invoking the              
provisions of 28 U.S.C. § 1331, defendants removed it to this             
forum.                                                                    
Parenthetically, the court points out that even if                   
defendants had shown that they are entitled to an award of                
reasonable attorney’s fees under the statute, it is unclear that          

any award of fees would, in fact, be “reasonable.”  To be sure,           
defense counsel has made laudable efforts to reduce her fee               
request and limit it to work performed exclusively on responding          
to Velez’s state law claims (she seeks an award of only $5,000,           
which is less than ten percent of the total amount billed to her          
client).  In that sense, the request is certainly “reasonable.”           
But, Velez has asserted that he is indigent.  Assuming that is            
true (which, under different circumstances, the court would               
verify by requiring Velez to submit a financial affidavit), a             
“reasonable” fee award might well be significantly less than              
even the modest amount sought by defendants.  Indeed, it might            
be nothing at all.  See, e.g., Maggi v. McComiskey, No. 17-CV-            

109-SM, 2017 WL 4803908, at *4–5 (D.N.H. Oct. 23, 2017)                   
(discussing mitigating factors than can counsel against an award          
of attorney’s fees, even when such an award is authorized and             
otherwise justified); Amatucci v. Hamilton, No. CIV. 05-CV-259-           
SM, 2007 WL 2993824, at *4 (D.N.H. Oct. 11, 2007) (same).  See            
generally Adams v. Bradshaw, 135 N.H. 7, 16 (1991) (noting the            
discretion afforded to trial courts in determining the                    
“reasonableness” of a fee award and the “tremendous deference”            
afforded such decisions).                                                 
                      Conclusion                                     
Defendants’ request for an award of attorney’s fees is               

based exclusively upon the provisions of RSA 627:1-a.                     
Accordingly, any such award must be specifically authorized by            
the plain and ordinary meaning of the language used in that               
statute.  But, defendants have failed to demonstrate that the             
“persons” who might be entitled to such a fee award under that            
statute – that is, the individual police officer defendants in            
this case – actually incurred any costs or attorney’s fees in             
this case.  Nor have defendants persuasively shown that the               
statute’s use of the word “person” should be interpreted                  
expansively to include municipal employers and/or insurance               
carriers with subrogation rights.2                                        



2    RSA 627:1-a, including its provision regarding entitlement           
to attorney’s fees, is similar to statutes that have been                 
enacted in several other states.  See, e.g., Idaho Code Ann.              
§ 6-808(1); La. Stat. Ann. § 9:2800.19(A); Mich. Comp. Laws Ann.          
§ 600.2922c; 42 Pa. Stat. and Cons. Stat. Ann. § 8340.2; Tenn.            
Code Ann. § 39-11-622; Wis. Stat. Ann. § 895.62(5); Wyo. Stat.            
Ann. § 6-1-204(c).  Yet, defendants have not cited any judicial           
opinions giving such statutes the broad interpretation that they          
urge this court to adopt.  Moreover, although the court does not          
find the statute to be ambiguous (and, therefore, does not                
resort to its legislative history), it is, perhaps, worth noting          
that defendants have not pointed to anything in the legislative           
history of RSA ch. 627 or its amendments that supports their              
broad interpretation of the word “person” in section 627:1-a.             
 As  the  party  seeking  an  award  of  fees  under  RSA  627:1-a, 
defendants  bear  the  burden  of  showing  entitlement  to  such  an 
award.   They  have  not  carried  that  burden.    For  the  forgoing 
reasons,  as  well  as  those  discussed  in  plaintiff’s  legal 
memoranda  (documents  no.  36-1  and  41),  defendants’  Motion  for  an 
Award  of  Attorney’s  Fees  Pursuant  to  RSA  627:1-a  (document  no. 
32)  is  denied. 

 SO  ORDERED. 
                                    Sousa   tetaddfe— 
                                      teven   &.  McAuliffe 
                                     United  States  District  Judge 
May  14,  2025 
cc:   Counsel  of  Record 

                                 18

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                           

               DISTRICT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE                             


Brandon Velez,                                                            
Plaintiff                                                            

v.                                 Case No. 23-cv-44-SM-TSM          
                                   Opinion No. 2024 DNH 048          

Rachael Eutzy, Erik Slocum,                                               
Casey Seigle, and                                                         
The City of Manchester, N.H.,                                             
Defendants                                                           



                       O R D E R                                     

In February of 2021, at around 1:20 a.m., Brandon Velez was          
driving his car near his apartment in Manchester, New Hampshire.          
Officers Eutzy and Slocum of the Manchester Police Department             
were on patrol and driving a marked police cruiser.  As Velez’s           
vehicle approached them, the officers noticed that one of the             
headlights on his car was broken and they initiated a routine             
traffic stop.  After a brief interaction with Velez, Officer              
Eutzy instructed him to get out of the car.  He refused and then          
resisted her efforts to drag him out of the car.  A brief                 
struggle ensued as Eutzy and Slocum forcibly removed Velez from           
the car.  He was arrested, taken into custody, and charged with           
disobeying a police officer and resisting arrest (both                    
misdemeanors) and operating at night without a headlight (a               
violation).  Velez pled guilty to the traffic violation and the           
misdemeanor charges were dropped.                                         


Velez then brought this civil suit in which he alleges,              
among other things, that he was the victim of excessive force,            
battery, wrongful arrest, and false imprisonment.  In total, he           
advances eleven federal and state common law claims against the           
City of Manchester and three of its police officers.  Defendants          
move for summary judgment on all claims in Velez’s complaint,             
asserting that there are no genuinely disputed material facts             
and claiming they are entitled to judgment as a matter of law.            
Velez objects.  For the reasons discussed, defendants’ motion is          
granted.                                                                  

                  Standard of Review                                 

When ruling on a motion for summary judgment, the court is           
“obliged to review the record in the light most favorable to the          
nonmoving party, and to draw all reasonable inferences in the             
nonmoving party’s favor.”  Block Island Fishing, Inc. v. Rogers,          
844 F.3d 358, 360 (1st Cir. 2016) (citation omitted).  Summary            
judgment is appropriate when the record reveals “no genuine               
dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to             
judgment as a matter of law.”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a).  In this            
context, a factual dispute “is ‘genuine’ if the evidence of               
record permits a rational factfinder to resolve it in favor of            
either party, and ‘material’ if its existence or nonexistence             
has the potential to change the outcome of the suit.”  Rando v.           

Leonard, 826 F.3d 553, 556 (1st Cir. 2016) (citation omitted).            
When material facts are genuinely disputed, such a dispute must           
be resolved by a trier of fact, not by the court on summary               
judgment.  See, e.g., Kelley v. LaForce, 288 F.3d 1, 9 (1st Cir.          
2002).                                                                    

When objecting to a motion for summary judgment, “[a]s to            
issues on which the party opposing summary judgment would bear            
the burden of proof at trial, that party may not simply rely on           
the absence of evidence but, rather, must point to definite and           
competent evidence showing the existence of a genuine issue of            
material fact.”  Perez v. Lorraine Enterprises, 769 F.3d 23, 29–          

30 (1st Cir. 2014).  In other words, “a laundry list of                   
possibilities and hypotheticals” and “[s]peculation about mere            
possibilities, without more, is not enough to stave off summary           
judgment.”  Tobin v. Fed. Express Corp., 775 F.3d 448, 451–52             
(1st Cir. 2014).  See generally Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc.,          
477 U.S. 242, 249 (1986).                                                 
In this case, the parties offer vastly different                     
interpretations of the relevant facts.  Consequently, it is               
probably important to note that,                                          


When the moving party has carried its burden under                   
Rule 56(c), its opponent must do more than simply show               
that there is some metaphysical doubt as to the                      
material facts.  Where the record taken as a whole                   
could not lead a rational trier of fact to find for                  
the nonmoving party, there is no “genuine issue for                  
trial.”  The mere existence of some alleged factual                  
dispute between the parties will not defeat an                       
otherwise properly supported motion for summary                      
judgment; the requirement is that there be no genuine                
issue of material fact.                                              

When opposing parties tell two different stories, one                
of which is blatantly contradicted by the record, so                 
that no reasonable jury could believe it, a court                    
should not adopt that version of the facts for                       
purposes of ruling on a motion for summary judgment.                 


Scott v. Harris, 550 U.S. 372, 380, 127 S. Ct. 1769, 1776, 167            
L. Ed. 2d 686 (2007) (citations and internal punctuation                  
omitted) (emphasis in original).                                          

                      Background                                     
The relevant and material facts in question were all                 
documented by the body-cameras worn by defendants Sergeant                
Seigle, Officer Eutzy, and Officer Slocum.  See Exhibits A-1, B-          
1, E-1 to Defendants’ Memorandum (document no. 15) (filed                 
conventionally).  Those videos are supplemented by the affidavit          
of the plaintiff, Brandon Velez (document no. 19-7) and his               
deposition testimony (document no. 15-4), as well as the                  
affidavits of the defendants, Officer Eutzy (document no. 15-2),          
Officer Slocum (document no. 15-3), and Sergeant Seigle                   

(document no. 15-5), and excerpts from their depositions                  
(documents no. 19-2, 19-3, and 19-6, respectively).                       

On February 22, 2021, shortly after 1:00 a.m., Velez drove           
from his apartment to a nearby Cumberland Farms to purchase               
snacks and cigarettes.  As he passed the store, he saw that it            
was closed and headed back toward his apartment.  At the same             
time, Manchester police officers Eutzy and Slocum were on patrol          
in a marked police cruiser.  Eutzy was driving and Slocum was in          
the passenger’s seat.  Velez was headed east on Hanover Street            
and the officers were driving west.  As the vehicles passed each          
other, Eutzy and Slocum noticed that one of the headlights on             

Velez’s car was out.  At his deposition, Velez testified that he          
had been aware for at least a few days that the headlight was             
not functioning.                                                          

Eutzy made a U-turn in an effort to catch up with Velez and          
stop him for the headlight violation.  Once they were behind              
Velez’s car, the officers noticed that one of Velez’s taillights          
was also out.  The officers also testified that Velez’s car was           
making an unusually loud noise.  So, at that point, the officers          
had observed at least two (and possibly three) motor vehicle              
violations.                                                               


Both Officers testified that once they began following               
Velez, they observed a change in his driving behavior.                    
Specifically, both testified that he increased the speed of his           
vehicle, which suggested to the officers that Velez wanted to             
avoid an interaction with them and might be engaged in (or about          
to engage in) criminal activity.  In their depositions, Officer           
Eutzy repeatedly described Velez’s driving as “evasive” and               
Officer Slocum said he believed Velez was attempting to “elude”           
them.  Velez saw the officers make a U-turn on Hanover Street,            
but says he didn’t think they were following him (though he does          
concede that there were no other cars on the road at the time).           
He denies attempting to evade or elude them.                              


With the officers following behind him, Velez made a left            
turn onto Maple Street and an immediate left onto Amherst                 
Street.  At that time, Officer Eutzy activated the cruiser’s              
blue lights to signal Velez to pull over and to initiate the              
traffic stop.  Velez turned into the driveway of his apartment            
on Amherst Street and turned off the car’s engine.  According to          
Officer Slocum, the address to which Velez returned was known to          
him to have been associated with criminal activity, including             
drug sales and prostitution.  Because of Velez’s arguably                 
suspicious driving, and based upon the location’s prior                   
association with criminal activity, the officers were on alert.           

They got out of the cruiser and approached Velez’s car - Slocum           
on the passenger’s side, and Eutzy on the driver’s side.                  
According to Velez, he did not roll down the driver’s window              
because it was not working.                                               

The officers approached the vehicle at a normal rate of              
speed.  Both were carrying flashlights; neither drew a weapon of          
any sort.  Eutzy was in uniform, while Slocum was dressed in              
plain clothes.  Slocum was first to engage Velez and spoke to             
him through the closed passenger’s window.  His tone was                  
friendly, relaxed, and conversational and he said, “Hi.  Police.          
Hi.  Talk to my partner over there.”  Velez had his hands raised          

up and in front of him (something the officers noted was unusual          
for someone involved in a minor traffic stop).                            

Eutzy called in the stop to her dispatcher and approached            
the driver’s side of the car.  In a relaxed and friendly tone             
she said, “Hey, how you doing?,” and opened the door so she               
could speak with Velez (he was holding his hands in the air and           
the window was not open).  He immediately questioned, “Why are            
you opening my door?  First off, I live here.  That’s                     
disrespectful.  You’re not supposed to open my door just like             
that.”  Eutzy responded calmly, “Okay, . . . Okay.  How is that           
disrespectful?” and Velez began to say again, “you’re not                 

supposed to open my door just like that.”  Eutzy then cut him             
off and said, in a more stern tone, “Stop talking.  Stop,                 
alright?”  Velez then said, “Ok, hold on,” lowered his hands,             
and reached into his left pocket.  Eutzy immediately said, “Hang          
on.  Get your hands out of your pockets dude.”  As it turned              
out, Velez retrieved his cell phone from his pocket.1                     

In response to Velez’s movement and out of concern for her           
safety, Eutzy decided she wanted him out of the vehicle so she            
could search him for weapons.  She calmly said, “Go ahead and             
hop out.”  Velez responded, “No.  No.  You can’t do that.”                
Eutzy insisted and said, “Come on,” and grabbed Velez’s left              


1    Velez says he retrieved his cell phone because he planned            
to record his interaction with the officers.  His expert witness          
goes so far as to suggest that the video from Eutzy’s body                
camera shows that Velez “appeared to be opening [his phone] by            
swiping the screen with his left hand.”  Expert Report of                 
Michael Pearl (document no. 19-5) at 4.  The court disagrees.             
At that moment, Velez’s left hand and his phone are in the                
shadows and obscured by Eutzy’s hands and flashlight.  See Eutzy          
Body Cam Video at 01:11 - 01:14.  More importantly, perhaps, the          
events unfolded so quickly that Eutzy had no time to process              
what Velez might have been doing with his phone, nor was there            
any indication that he intended to start recording their                  
interaction.  As soon as he lowered his hands and moved his left          
hand into his pocket, Officer Eutzy reacted immediately and               
ordered him out of the car.                                               
arm.  Velez began screaming, “Why are you doing this?  Why are            
you doing this?  You haven’t even told me why you pulled me               
over.”  According to Eutzy, Velez never gave her an opportunity           

to explain the reason for the stop.  He was speaking “very                
rapidly” and his behavior was aggressive and argumentative.               
Eutzy Deposition (document no. 19-2) at 26-27.  See also Id. at           
32 (“There are numerous things that he could have done                    
differently.  The one I find to be the most important would have          
been him giving me the opportunity to identify myself and to              
give the reason for the stop before he continued to speak.”).             

Parenthetically, the court notes that although Velez seems           
to question Eutzy’s authority to order him out of the vehicle,            
there can be no real doubt that, under the circumstances                  
presented (lawful traffic stop, odd behavior by Velez,                    

legitimate safety concerns, etc.), Eutzy was authorized to                
insist that Velez exit his car.  See, e.g., United States v.              
Coplin, 463 F.3d 96, 102 (1st Cir. 2006) (“[A] police officer             
may, as a matter of course, require the driver of a car lawfully          
stopped for a suspected traffic violation to step out of his              
vehicle.  That rule is grounded in legitimate concerns for                
officer safety - and it is dispositive here.  Since the stop was          
lawful, it follows inexorably that the officers were authorized,          
as a security measure, to order the driver out of the car                 
pending the completion of their investigation into the suspected          
traffic violation.”) (citations omitted).  See generally                  
Pennsylvania v. Mimms, 434 U.S. 106, 111 (1977).                          


As Velez continued to question why Eutzy was trying to               
remove him from the vehicle, he braced himself against the door           
frame and pushed himself deeper into the car.  By that point,             
Officer Slocum had arrived from the other side of the vehicle             
and assisted Officer Eutzy as she attempted to get Velez out of           
the car.  Slocum can be heard saying, “Get out of the car.                
You’re under arrest.”  Meanwhile, Velez continued screaming               
incomprehensively and shouting “Help!”                                    

During the brief struggle, Velez continued to brace himself          
against the door frame and struggled against the officers’                

efforts to remove him from the car.  The officers say that                
because they perceived Velez to have been driving erratically             
(if not evasively), he had previously had his hands raised in             
the air (atypical behavior for someone involved in a routine              
traffic stop), was confrontational, if not aggressive, in his             
behaviors, and because they had not yet cleared the car of any            
potential weapons, they became increasingly concerned with                
getting him out of the vehicle.                                           
Because Velez continued to struggle against the officers             
and refused to exit the vehicle, Slocum delivered two blows to            
Velez’s abdomen - a form of “pain compliance” for which Slocum            

says he was trained as a police officer.  One purpose of the              
blows was to force Velez to brace himself, so Slocum could see            
his hands and prevent him from reaching for any weapons.                  
Another was to “stun” Velez and prevent him from continuing to            
anchor himself in the vehicle.  Velez remained non-compliant and          
continued to struggle.  So, Officer Slocum used “two, controlled          
hard-hand techniques to the area of Mr. Velez’s head - again, in          
an effort to stun Velez and to achieve ‘pain compliance.’”                

Velez continued to struggle.  He braced his hands on either          
side of the door frame and one of his legs against Officer                
Slocum’s thigh.  Because the struggle was escalating and the              

risk of potentially significant injury to Velez and/or the                
officers was increasing, Slocum decided to deploy his Taser.  He          
testified as follows:                                                     

Because the interaction was escalating in physicality,               
I deployed my Taser X2 using the “drive stun”                        
deployment method into Mr. Velez’s side area.  It was                
February, and very cold that evening, and I did not                  
believe that the Taser deployment was effective                      
because Mr. Velez was wearing thick clothing and he                  
continued to thrash his body towards the area of my                  
Taser.  Mr. Velez also flailed his arms and legs and                 
was actively swatting at my Taser.                                   
I deployed my Taser a second time using the “probe”                  
deployment method into Mr. Velez’s abdomen.  Again, I                
do not think that neuromuscular incapacitation was                   
achieved due to Mr. Velez’s clothing and continued                   
thrashing.  However, at this point another officer had               
arrived to the scene and was pushing Mr. Velez from                  
the inside of the passenger side of the car.  I                      
believe that the “surprise” of the Taser deployment                  
and the other officer’s pushing is what ultimately                   
allowed Officer Eutzy and I to transition Mr. Velez                  
down to the ground for handcuffing.                                  


Affidavit of Officer Erik Slocum (document no. 15-3) at paras.            
33-34.  Officer Slocum’s account is fully consistent with the             
video evidence from the officers’ body cameras.                           

Even after Velez was removed from the vehicle and laying on          
the ground, he struggled against the officers’ efforts to                 
handcuff him.  He was repeatedly told to “stop fighting” and to           
present his hands for cuffing, but he continued to resist and             
scream.  Officer Slocum described those events as follows:                

Once Officer Eutzy and I had Mr. Velez on the ground,                
I observed him continue to resist arrest and                         
detention.  I heard Officer Eutzy give multiple                      
commands to stop fighting and to provide his hands for               
handcuffing.  I also advised Mr. Velez to stop                       
fighting and submit to the handcuffing.  Mr. Velez                   
continued to resist arrest and detention.  He refused                
to turn onto his stomach as directed.                                

Eventually, I observed that Officer Eutzy was able to                
get one of Mr. Velez’s hands into handcuffs, but he                  
continued to resist arrest and detention for                         
handcuffing of the second hand.  I then observed                     
Officer Eutzy secure Mr. Velez’s second hand into                    
handcuffs.                                                           
I heard Officer Eutzy announce that Plaintiff’s hands                
were handcuffed.  I went hands-off upon hearing this                 
announcement.                                                        


Slocum Affidavit at paras. 35-37.  Once he was cuffed and back            
on his feet, Velez caught his breath while Eutzy checked that             
the handcuffs were properly secured and then locked them.                 

Meanwhile, Sergeant Seigle arrived at the scene immediately          
before the officers successfully had Velez in custody.  Video             
from his body camera shows that as he came upon the scene, he             
could see that the officers were on the ground, struggling to             
handcuff Velez.  Seigle stood to the side and observed; he was            
not involved in the effort to handcuff Velez until the very end,          
when he reached out and grabbed Velez’s sweatshirt/right arm for          
approximately three seconds (seemingly to hold Velez still while          
officers handcuffed him).  In all, Sergeant Seigle was present            
for and witnessed approximately 35 seconds of the struggle                
before Officer Eutzy can be heard saying, “got him cuffed.”  In           
total, from the time at which Officer Eutzy told Velez to “go             
ahead and hop out” of the car until the time at which she                 
notified all responding officers that Velez had successfully              
been handcuffed, approximately 2 minutes and six seconds                  
elapsed.                                                                  
Velez’s recollection of those events is decidedly                    
different.  He paints a picture in which he was fearful, if not           
timid, rather than argumentative and aggressive.  In his view,            

he was entirely compliant with every instruction given to him,            
and never resisted the officers’ efforts to get him out of the            
car or to handcuff him.  Rather, he says what the officers may            
have perceived to be “resistance” was merely his “instinctive”            
and “reflexive” “recoiling” when Officer Eutzy grabbed his arm.           
The officers, in his recounting of the relevant events, grossly           
overreacted, lacked a legal justification and a factual basis to          
remove him from the car, and responded with excessive force in            
trying to achieve their illegitimate goal.  While that certainly          
may be Velez’s perception of what happened to him, it is                  
contradicted by the video evidence.                                       


As a result of his struggle with the officers, Velez                 
suffered a small cut on his left hand (perhaps from the effort            
to handcuff him) and some minor scrapes and bruising - his                
booking photos show a bruise on his forehead and a small                  
abrasion under his left eye - but no lasting physical injuries.           
The police intake form (which Velez signed at the station)                
reported that his “general health” was “good.”  Nevertheless,             
Velez says that despite telling the officers that he was                  
injured, not a single officer summoned any medical assistance             
for him that night/morning.  He says he suffers from ongoing              
emotional symptoms arguably consistent with depression as well            
as a lasting fear of the police.  There are, however, no medical          

records to support those claims.                                          

At the Manchester police station, Velez was processed and            
charged with two misdemeanors (disobeying a police officer and            
resisting arrest) and a traffic violation (operating at night             
without a headlight).  As noted earlier, he pled guilty to the            
traffic violation and the misdemeanor charges were dropped.               
This litigation ensued.                                                   

                      Discussion                                     
The Court of Appeals for the First Circuit has provided a            
concise summary of the law applicable to nearly all of Velez’s            

federal claims.                                                           

A person may recover damages from a state or local                   
official who, while acting under color of state law,                 
commits a constitutional tort.  The excessive use of                 
force by a police officer against an arrestee is such                
a tort.  An officer may be held liable not only for                  
his personal use of excessive force, but also for his                
failure to intervene in appropriate circumstances to                 
protect an arrestee from the excessive use of force by               
his fellow officers.                                                 

Liability will attach to the municipal employer where                
its failure to properly train its officers amounts to                
deliberate indifference to the rights of persons with                
whom the police come into contact, and where a                       
specific deficiency in training is the “moving force”                
behind a constitutional injury.  A supervisory officer               
may be held liable for the behavior of his subordinate               
officers where his action or inaction is affirmatively               
linked to that behavior in the sense that it could be                
characterized as supervisory encouragement,                          
condonation or acquiescence, or gross negligence                     
amounting to deliberate indifference.  If, however,                  
the officer has inflicted no constitutional harm,                    
neither the municipality nor the supervisor can be                   
held liable.                                                         


Wilson v. Town of Mendon, 294 F.3d 1, 6 (1st Cir. 2002)                   
(citations and internal punctuation omitted).  Most of Velez’s            
claims rise or fall on the resolution of a single question: was           
the level of force employed by Eutzy and/or Slocum “objectively           
reasonable,” or was it constitutionally “excessive.”                      
Accordingly, the court turns to those claims first.                       

I.   Excessive Force (Fourth Amendment).                                  
Velez asserts that Officers Eutzy and Slocum used excessive          
force by “grabbing, punching, and pulling” him from the vehicle           
(count 2) and he says Slocum used additional excessive force              
when he deployed his Taser (count 3).  According to Velez,                

Upon asking why he was being detained and                            
instinctively slightly shrinking away, Eutzy and                     
Slocum responded by repeatedly punching Brandon in the               
face and head, pulling him from his vehicle, and                     
throwing him onto the ground.  Brandon had not                       
committed, nor was he about to commit, a crime.  Nor                 
was there probable cause to believe that he did or                   
was.  Even if he had committed a crime, or if there                  
was probable cause to believe so, the force used far                 
exceeded what was necessary to effectuate Brandon’s                  
arrest.                                                              

Brandon had done nothing to merit the use of such                    
force, and the use of such force was objectively                     
unreasonable.                                                        

                         * * *                                       

Slocum initially tased Brandon less than ten seconds                 
after Eutzy told Brandon to get out of the vehicle,                  
and despite not having resisted.  Immediately after                  
that, as he was thrown to the ground and pinned,                     
Brandon had given himself up, and he was not resisting               
in any way, yet Slocum tased him again.                              

Brandon was still not engaged in any behavior that                   
made it necessary for the use of such force.  Thus,                  
the force was objectively unreasonable, and therefore                
excessive.                                                           


Complaint (document no. 1-1) at paras. 42-43, 47-48 (emphasis             
supplied).  As the video evidence plainly shows, however,                 
Velez’s account of the relevant events of that evening -                  
especially as it relates to his own behavior - is not accurate.           
A brief, but more correct, summary of the indisputable evidence           
is this: Velez refused to comply with Officer Eutzy’s lawful              
command to exit his vehicle and then actively and relentlessly            
resisted the officers’ efforts to remove him and, subsequently,           
to secure him in handcuffs.                                               

In Graham v. Connor the Supreme Court discussed the basic            
contours and elements of an excessive force claim:                        
The “reasonableness” of a particular use of force must               
be judged from the perspective of a reasonable officer               
on the scene, rather than with the 20/20 vision of                   
hindsight.  The Fourth Amendment is not violated by an               
arrest based on probable cause, even though the wrong                
person is arrested, nor by the mistaken execution of a               
valid search warrant on the wrong premises.                          

With respect to a claim of excessive force, the same                 
standard of reasonableness at the moment applies: Not                
every push or shove, even if it may later seem                       
unnecessary in the peace of a judge’s chambers,                      
violates the Fourth Amendment.  The calculus of                      
reasonableness must embody allowance for the fact that               
police officers are often forced to make split-second                
judgments - in circumstances that are tense,                         
uncertain, and rapidly evolving - about the amount of                
force that is necessary in a particular situation.                   


Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386, 396-97 (1989) (emphasis                   
supplied) (citations and internal punctuation omitted).  The              
inquiry into whether the officers’ conduct was “reasonable” is            
an objective one.  That is to say, “The question is whether the           
officers’ actions are ‘objectively reasonable’ in light of the            
facts and circumstances confronting them, without regard to               
their underlying intent or motivation.”  Id. at 397.                      

More recently, the Court set out a non-exhaustive list of            
factors that are relevant when considering whether an officer’s           
use of force was “objectively reasonable” or “excessive.”  Those          
factors include the following:                                            

the relationship between the need for the use of force               
and the amount of force used;                                        
any effort made by the officer to temper or to limit                 
the amount of force;                                                 

the severity of the security problem at issue;                       

the threat reasonably perceived by the officer;                      

whether the plaintiff was actively resisting; and                    

the extent of the plaintiff’s injury.                                


See Kingsley v. Hendrickson, 576 U.S. 389, 397 (2015).                    

Here, each of those factors counsels in favor of the                 
conclusion that neither Officer Eutzy nor Officer Slocum                  
employed constitutionally excessive force against Velez.  From            
the perspective of an objective observer, Velez’s behavior that           
night was suspicious.  He appeared to be driving erratically              
and/or evasively as soon as the officers began to follow him.             
He stopped his car in front of an apartment complex known (at             
least to Slocum) to have a history of criminal activity.  Upon            
stopping his vehicle, Velez immediately raised his hands and              
held them above his head - something the officers noted was               
atypical behavior for a motorist involved in a routine traffic            
stop.  Almost immediately after Officer Eutzy began talking with          
him, Velez became excited, confrontational, and aggressive in             
his tone and manner of speech.  Then, when he suddenly reached            
into his pocket (to retrieve what turned out to be his phone) at          
the same time that Eutzy told him not to move his hands, she              
reasonably decided that he needed to exit the vehicle so she              
could pat him down for weapons.  She gave him a lawful order to           

do so, but he refused to comply, saying,  “No.  No.  You can’t            
do that.”  She then grabbed his sweatshirt and attempted to pull          
him out of the car.  Velez actively resisted her efforts, braced          
himself against the door frame, and began struggling and                  
screaming.  All of the events about which Velez complains could           
have been avoided had he remained calm, allowed Eutzy the                 
opportunity to introduce herself and explain the reason for the           
stop, and complied with her lawful (and reasonable) commands.             
He did not.  Instead, he continued to interrupt her, he abruptly          
lowered his hands and reached into his pocket (giving her good            
reason for concern), refused to exit the vehicle when told to do          
so, and then fought the officers’ efforts to extract him.2                





2    As plaintiff’s expert witness notes, with the benefit of             
hindsight and without the stresses and potential dangers that             
were present that night, it is possible to imagine things the             
officers might have done differently.  For example, plaintiff’s           
expert suggests that Eutzy could have identified herself and              
stated the reason for the stop through Velez’s closed (and                
apparently non-functioning) driver’s window, before she opened            
the car door.  Perhaps that is true.  But, that she did not does          
not affect the analysis of whether she or Slocum employed                 
excessive force once Velez was told to exit the vehicle and then          
steadfastly refused.                                                      
Officer Eutzy’s decision to instruct Velez to exit the car           
was both lawful and reasonable.  The level of force used by the           
officers to extract him from the vehicle (and to prevent him              

from possibly accessing anything that could be used as a weapon)          
was reasonable and escalated in measured form.  Eutzy began by            
telling him to exit in a calm tone.  He refused.  She then                
tugged on his sweatshirt.  He recoiled, braced himself against            
the door frame, and began screaming.  Slocum arrived and                  
attempted to pull Velez from the car.  When Velez escalated his           
resistance, Slocum struck him - twice in the abdomen (with no             
result) and then twice in the head (again, with no result).               
Velez continued to struggle, resist, and scream.                          

The impasse continued, with no apparent resolution in sight          
and the possibility that someone might be seriously injured               

increased by the moment.  Officer Slocum decided to employ less-          
than-lethal force - in the form of a Taser - to secure Velez’s            
compliance and to extract him from the vehicle.  Given the                
circumstances facing him, Slocum’s decision was both objectively          
reasonable and measured.  Once Velez was removed from the car             
and taken to the ground, he continued to resist, but the                  
officers’ response remained tempered and appropriate as they              
struggled to gain control of Velez’s hands and secure them in             
handcuffs (for example, Velez does not claim - and there is no            
evidence to suggest - that any of the officers punched, kneed,            
or kicked him; they simply restrained him and struggled to                
control his arms and hands).  Although the events in question             

unfolded rapidly and under conditions that would reasonably give          
any officer concern for their safety, defendants escalated the            
level of force employed against Velez in a measured way and only          
in response to his increasing resistance.                                 

And, finally, although a far less significant factor, it             
bears noting that Velez’s physical injuries were comparatively            
minor: a bump on his forehead, a scrape under his eye, and a              
small cut on his hand (and, perhaps, some bruises and/or scrapes          
on his lower body that were not visible in his booking photos).           
None of those injuries was lasting or serious.  See generally             
Gaudreault v. Municipality of Salem, Mass., 923 F.2d 203, 208–09          

(1st Cir. 1990).                                                          

Viewing the totality of circumstances facing Officers Eutzy          
and Slocum that night, a reasonable and properly-instructed jury          
could not, as a matter of law, conclude that either officer               
acted in a manner that was objectively unreasonable or                    
excessive.  Consequently, as to plaintiff’s excessive force               
claims, defendants are entitled to judgment as a matter of law.           
II.  Failure to Intervene.                                                
In count six of his complaint Velez alleges that Sergeant            
Seigle violated his constitutionally protected rights by failing          

to stop Eutzy and/or Slocum from using excessive force.  It is            
well established that a police officer can, under certain                 
circumstances, be liable for his or her failure to intervene to           
stop another officer’s use of excessive force.  See, e.g.,                
Simone v. Monaco, No. 20-CV-336-SM, 2020 WL 5077178, at *3-4              
(D.N.H. Aug. 27, 2020).  But, Sergeant Seigle arrived at the              
scene only in time to observe the last few seconds before Velez           
was secured in handcuffs.  It is, therefore, unclear how, if at           
all, he could have intervened on Velez’s behalf.  See, e.g.,              
Gaudreault, 923 F.2d at 207, n.3 (“A police officer cannot be             
held liable for failing to intercede if he has no ‘realistic              
opportunity’ to prevent an attack.”).                                     


More importantly, however, because the court has already             
concluded that the force used against Velez was, as a matter of           
law, objectively reasonable and not excessive, there cannot be            
any derivative claim against Sergeant Seigle based upon his               
alleged failure to intervene.  See generally Simone v. Monaco,            
No. 20-CV-336-SM, 2022 WL 88196, at *9–10 (D.N.H. Jan. 6, 2022)           
(noting that one essential element of the “failure to intervene           
claim” is, of course, that the bystander officer must have                
actually witnessed the use of excessive force and appreciated it          
as such); Norton v. Cross Border Initiative Task Force, No. 06-           
CV-490-PB, 2009 WL 1651238, at *6 (D.N.H. June 12, 2009) (same).          


III. Retaliatory Arrest (First Amendment).                                
In count one of his complaint, Velez asserts that Officer            
Eutzy arrested him “in retaliation for exercising a                       
constitutionally protected activity, for which there was no               
probable cause.”  Complaint at para. 37.  Specifically, Velez             
claims Eutzy “arrested [him] because he was attempting to record          
her [on his cell phone].”  Id. at para. 38 (emphasis supplied).           
But, aside from the temporal proximity between Velez reaching             
into his pocket and Eutzy’s immediate decision to remove him              
from the car, there is no evidence to support such a claim                
(other than Velez’s testimony that, if he had been permitted the          

time to unlock his phone and open his camera, he would have               
begun recording).  From Eutzy’s perspective (or that of any               
objective observer), there was no suggestion that Velez intended          
to record their interaction nor, more importantly, is there any           
evidence that Eutzy understood that was Velez’s plan.  See Eutzy          
Deposition at 64.                                                         

If Velez had told Eutzy, “hey, I want to record this                 
interaction,” or if he had already been recording when she                
opened the car door to speak with him, perhaps he might have a            
more substantial claim.  But, on this record, there is no                 
evidence from which a jury might plausibly and sustainably                

conclude that Eutzy arrested Velez in response to and in                  
retaliation for Velez’s unexpressed and undisclosed plan/desire           
to record their interaction.                                              

IV.  Wrongful Arrest (Fourth Amendment).                                  

Next, Velez contends that Officer Eutzy, Officer Slocum,             
and Sergeant Seigle violated his constitutionally protected               
right to be free from arrest that is unsupported by probable              
cause.  Probable cause exists when,                                       

police officers, relying on reasonably trustworthy                   
facts and circumstances, have information upon which a               
reasonably prudent person would believe the suspect                  
committed or was committing a crime.  It does not                    
require law enforcement officers to have an ironclad                 
case on the proverbial silver platter.  Instead, it                  
suffices if a prudent law enforcement officer would                  
reasonably conclude that the likelihood existed that                 
criminal activities were afoot, and that a particular                
suspect was probably engaged in them.  Consequently,                 
probable cause is not a creature of certainty and does               
not require either the level of proof needed to secure               
a conviction or even an unusually high degree of                     
assurance.                                                           


United States v. Centeno-Gonzalez, 989 F.3d 36, 45 (1st Cir.              
2021) (emphasis supplied).  See also Bryant v. Noether, 163 F.            
Supp. 2d 98, 107–08 (D.N.H. 2001).                                        
On the record evidence before the court it is plain that             
defendants had probable cause to arrest Velez and his claim to            
the contrary lacks both legal and factual support.  Initially,            

the officers had an obvious and undeniable reason to suspect              
that Velez had committed a traffic offense: he was driving at             
night with a non-operational headlight.  Velez concedes that.             
There is, then, no dispute that the traffic stop itself was               
entirely lawful.                                                          

But, both officers testified that even before Velez stopped          
his vehicle and while they were following him, Velez sped up and          
his driving became “evasive.”  See, e.g., Deposition of Rachael           
Eutzy (document no. 19-2) at 21, 22, and 31; Deposition of Erik           
Slocum (document no. 19-3) at 22.  Additionally, Officer Slocum           
testified that he asked Velez his name and address at least               

twice and both times Velez refused to provide that information.           
Id. at 37.  See also Slocum Body Cam Video at 04:45-04:52.  See           
generally RSA 265:4 (it is unlawful to “willfully attempt to              
elude pursuit by a law enforcement officer by increasing speed”           
and it is also unlawful for any driver to refuse to provide               
their name, address, and date of birth when requested by a law            
enforcement officer).                                                     
While Velez denies that he attempted to evade the officers           
(or increased his speed) and says he was never asked to provide           
his name and address until after he was in handcuffs, it is               

indisputable that he refused to comply with Officer Eutzy’s               
lawful and objectively reasonable command to exit his vehicle.            
It is equally plain that he then resisted both the effort to              
extract him from the vehicle and to secure him in handcuffs.              
See generally RSA 642:2 (it is unlawful for anyone to “knowingly          
or purposely physically interfere with a person recognized to be          
a law enforcement official, including a probation or parole               
officer, seeking to effect an arrest or detention of the person           
or another regardless of whether there is a legal basis for the           
arrest.”) (emphasis supplied).                                            

Despite the video evidence to the contrary, Velez                    

repeatedly claims that he did not disobey any orders from the             
officers, see, e.g., Plaintiff’s Opposition Memorandum at 31,             
33, and he says “there is no extrinsic evidence supporting a              
claim that [he] was in any way resisting,” see id. at 21.  See            
also Id. at 33 (“Neither Eutzy nor Slocum had probable cause to           
arrest [Velez].  He had committed no crime and was not                    
disobeying any orders.  Instead, Eutzy and Slocum arrested                
[Velez] for asking questions and attempting to record them.”).            
Velez inexplicably ignores Eutzy’s recorded order to get out of           
the vehicle, to which he responded, “No.  No.  You can’t do               
that” - thereby demonstrating that he plainly heard and                   
understood her command.  He also ignores his recorded active              

resistance to the officers’ efforts to extract him from the               
vehicle.  In Velez’s view, his conduct was not that of                    
opposition or confrontation.  Rather, he characterizes it as              
simply a “reflexive reaction” to having been “grabbed without             
warning, repeatedly punched, and tasered,” id. at 7, and                  
describes himself as “non-threatening and frightened,” id. at             
33.                                                                       

Of course, it may explain Velez’s conduct to characterize            
it as “fearful,” or “instinctive,” or “reflexive,” but that does          
not excuse it.  Nor does it convert that behavior into something          
other than what it plainly was.  Velez was given a lawful order           

to exit the vehicle and, for whatever reason, he decided to               
refuse and he then actively and forcefully resisted.  Those               
facts are established and not open to reasonable debate.                  

Velez’s arrest was entirely consistent with the                      
requirements of the Fourth Amendment and amply supported by               
probable cause.  As to Velez’s claim that he was wrongfully               
arrested, in violation of the Fourth Amendment, defendants are            
entitled to judgment as a matter of law.                                  
V.   Failure to Render Medical Assistance.                                
Next, Velez claims that all individually named defendants            
violated his substantive due process rights when they failed to           

provide him with prompt medical assistance for his obvious and            
severe injuries.  Complaint at paras. 56-57.  Velez correctly             
articulates the applicable legal standard - including the                 
requirement that the plaintiff must have had a “serious medical           
need” that was so obvious that even someone not trained in                
medicine would recognize it.  See Plaintiff’s Opposition                  
Memorandum at 28.  See generally Miranda-Rivera v. Toledo-                
Davila, 813 F.3d 64, 74 (1st Cir. 2016) (“A ‘serious medical              
need’ is one that has been diagnosed by a physician as mandating          
treatment, or one that is so obvious that even a lay person               
would easily recognize the necessity for a doctor’s attention.”)          
(citation omitted).                                                       


Importantly, however, Velez has failed to identify or                
document any such injuries or “serious medical needs.”  Instead,          
he focuses on the fact the he was screaming “I can’t breathe”             
throughout his resistance to the officers’ efforts to subdue              
him, claimed he was “hurt” in the aftermath of that struggle,             
and cried “ow” as he was being escorted to a police cruiser -             
all implying (it would seem) that any reasonable, objective               
observer would have (and should have) recognized he had a                 
“serious medical need” requiring prompt professional attention.           
See, e.g., Plaintiff’s Opposition Memorandum at 29-30.  But,              
even following his release from custody, Velez waited nearly two          

days before seeking medical advice about his soreness and pain.           
Deposition of Brandon Velez (document no. 15-4) at 47-48.                 

In his deposition, Officer Slocum was questioned at length           
about the steps he took to verify that Velez did not require              
professional medical attention:                                           

Q.   If a member of the public receives several                      
     strikes to the head, will you look into whether                 
     they need medical attention?                                    

A.   If they’re alert and oriented and say they do not               
     need medical attention or make no indication that               
     they need medical attention, I would not;                       
     however, if they were -- say, had altered mental                
     status, unable to answer questions appropriately,               
     yeah, I would be concerned and call for, say,                   
     medical assistance.                                             

Q.   What if a person indicates they’re having trouble               
     breathing; is that an indication that you need to               
     see if they need medical attention?                             

A.   Depends on the circumstance.                                    

Q.   Can you expound on that?                                        

A.   Yes.  If they, say, have just been in a physical                
     altercation and appear to be showing signs of                   
     just being -- exerting themselves physically,                   
     say, a physical fight or something of that                      
     nature, if they say that they are having trouble                
     breathing, if that took -- if it never resolved                 
     itself within a short time -- space, absolutely,                
     that would be something to worry about.                         
Q.   What steps did you take to ensure that if Brandon               
Velez needed medical attention, he would receive                
it?                                                             

A.   Brandon Velez never requested any medical                       
attention that night.  It is posted in our                      
booking area, that if you do need medical                       
attention, just ask for it.  He made no                         
indication that he needed medical attention.                    

Q.   What steps did you take to determine whether or                 
not Brandon needed medical attention?                           

A.   As far as my observations?                                      

Q.   No, what steps did you take to determine whether                
or not Brandon needed medical attention?                        

A.   Through my observations of his actions, his                     
mental status, his ability to breathe, speak and                
function, stand on his own.  Through my                         
observations.                                                   

Q.   So did you observe Brandon being punched in the                 
head?                                                           

A.   Yes.                                                            

Q.   Multiple times?                                                 

A.   Yes.                                                            

Q.   Did you observe Brandon saying that he was having               
trouble breathing?                                              

A.   Momentarily after our physical struggle of him                  
resisting arrest, he did say a couple times, I                  
cannot breathe.  But he was still able to yell                  
and scream and his airway was still patent, he’s                
still alert and oriented.  That complaint                       
subsided within a matter of seconds.  [After]                   
which Mr. Velez was able to stand on his own, was               
able to speak.  I had no concern that he was                    
exhibiting any kind of signs of respiratory                     
distress.                                                       
Q.   Are you a medical professional?                                 

A.   Yes, sir.  I’m an advanced EMT.                                 


Slocum Deposition at 23-26.                                               

Given the circumstances immediately leading up to the point          
at which he was finally secured in handcuffs, Velez was, no               
doubt, exhausted and in substantial discomfort as he was                  
escorted to the police transport van.  He put up a brief, but             
significant struggle against the officers and considerable                
effort was required to subdue him before anyone was seriously             
injured.  Velez testified that his discomfort - facial pain,              
chest pain where he was struck, and overall soreness - all                
largely resolved within a few weeks of the incident.  See                 
Deposition of Brandon Velez at 53-56.  The injuries Velez                 
describes do not give rise to a viable claim for deliberate               
indifference to a serious medical need.  See, e.g., Gaudreault,           
923 F.2d at 207-08 (“[Plaintiff] displayed multiple bruises, to           
the forehead, left and right orbits of his eyes, nasal area,              
left ribs, right flank and left shoulder, and was suffering from          
a corneal abrasion and an abrasion on the upper back. . . .               
While his injuries may have been ‘obvious’ in the sense that his          
bruises and abrasions were visible, the medical record                    
demonstrates that he did not display any needs so patent as to            
make lay persons . . . remiss in failing to arrange for                   
immediate medical attention.”) (emphasis in original).                    


Not only would no reasonable observer have thought that              
Velez required prompt medical attention for a “serious medical            
need,” but there is no suggestion whatsoever that any of the              
defendants was “deliberately indifferent” to his health or well-          
being.  See Miranda-Rivera, 813 F.3d at 74 (“Deliberate                   
indifference requires (1) that the official be aware of facts             
from which the inference could be drawn that a substantial risk           
of serious harm exists, and (2) that he draw that inference.  A           
factfinder can conclude that a government official was aware of           
a substantial risk of serious harm based on the fact that the             
risk was obvious.  However, there is no deliberate indifference           
if an official responds reasonably to the risk.”) (citations and          

internal punctuation omitted).  See generally Farmer v. Brennan,          
511 U.S. 825 (1994); Estelle v. Gamble, 429 U.S. 97 (1976).  See          
also Affidavit of Officer Eutzy (document no. 15-2) at para. 38           
(“I observed Mr. Velez’s condition.  Mr. Velez did not have any           
obvious or serious medical issue apparent to me at this time.  I          
recognize (and did at the time) that I have a duty to render              
medical aid to a suspect if necessary and appropriate.  However,          
I did not see anything about Mr. Velez’s condition at that                
moment that led me to believe he needed or required medical               
aid.”); id. at para. 40 (after escorting Velez to the transport           
wagon, Eutzy says she “spoke to Velez in a calm, neutral tone.            
[She] observed that Mr. Velez had fully caught his breath at              

this point and otherwise appeared fine.”); id. at para. 41 (at            
the station, “Mr. Velez did not appear to have any serious                
medical need at booking that caused me to be concerned for his            
health.  Mr. Velez also did not request medical attention from            
me during booking and processing.  There is a large poster or             
sign in MPD’s booking area that explains that medical attention           
will be provided if requested.  The notice is in several                  
languages.”).  See also Affidavit of Officer Slocum (document             
no. 15-3) at para. 41 (“Mr. Velez did not appear to have any              
serious medical need at booking that caused me to be concerned            
for his health.  Mr. Velez did not request medical attention              
from me during booking and processing.”).                                 


As to Velez’s deliberate indifference claim, defendants are          
entitled to judgment as a matter of law.  See generally                   
Gaudreault, 923 F.2d at 208–09.                                           

VI.  Failure to Train (“Monell” Claim).                                   
Velez’s final federal claim is against the City of                   
Manchester.  In it, he alleges that “an unwritten policy or               
custom in Manchester allows officers to use force that is not             
proportional to the circumstances, allows officers to make                
wrongful arrests, and otherwise violate individuals’                      
constitutional rights.”  Complaint at para. 64.  See generally            

Monell v. New York City Dept. of Social Srvs., 436 U.S. 658               
(1978).                                                                   

But, as the court has already held, the defendant police             
officers did not employ excessive force against Velez.                    
Consequently, the City of Manchester cannot be liable under               
Monell.  See, e.g., City of Los Angeles v. Heller, 475 U.S. 796,          
799, (1986) (“[N]either Monell, nor any other of our cases                
authorizes the award of damages against a municipal corporation           
based on the actions of one of its officers when in fact the              
jury has concluded that the officer inflicted no constitutional           
harm.  If a person has suffered no constitutional injury at the           

hands of the individual police officer, the fact that the                 
departmental regulations might have authorized the use of                 
constitutionally excessive force is quite beside the point.”).            


VII. Common Law Assault and Battery.                                      

In count eight of his complaint, Velez alleges that                  
Officers Eutzy and Slocum committed common law assault and                
battery by “grabbing, punching, and pulling” him from the                 
vehicle.  In count nine, he further alleges that Officer Slocum           
committed assault and battery upon him when Slocum deployed his           
Taser.  Given the evidence of record, those claims fail as a              
matter of law.                                                            


As this court (Barbadoro, J.) has noted, police officers             
are permitted to use that amount of force reasonably necessary            
to take a suspect into custody.                                           

[Plaintiff] alleges that the officers’ conduct in                    
arresting him constitutes assault and battery.  In New               
Hampshire, justification is a complete defense to any                
civil action, and “[a] law enforcement officer is                    
justified in using non-deadly force upon another                     
person when and to the extent that he reasonably                     
believes it necessary to effect an arrest or                         
detention[.]”  N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 627:1; N.H. Rev.               
Stat. Ann. § 627:5.  Under this statute,                             
reasonableness is determined by an objective standard.               


Dionne v. Amatucci, No. 10-CV-230-PB, 2011 WL 4915550, at *6,             
2011 DNH 170 (D.N.H. Oct. 17, 2011) (citing State v. Cunningham,          
159 N.H. 103, 107 (2009)).  See also Raiche v. Pietroski, 623             
F.3d 30, 40 (1st Cir. 2010) (“Where a plaintiff alleges both a            
§ 1983 excessive force claim and common law claims for assault            
and battery, our determination of the reasonableness of the               
force used under § 1983 controls our determination of the                 
reasonableness of the force used under the common law assault             
and battery claims.”).  Moreover, New Hampshire law specifically          
provides that, “No person shall incur any civil liability to              
another person by taking any action against such person which             
would constitute justification pursuant to RSA 627.”  N.H. Rev.           
Stat. Ann. § 507:8-d.3                                                    


So it is in this case.  Officers Eutzy and Slocum were               
legally authorized to use reasonable - but not excessive - force          
to extract Velez from the vehicle, to secure his hands, to                
handcuff him, and to take him into custody.  They complied with           
that legal mandate.  Under the circumstances, and given the               
evidentiary record, the conduct of Officers Eutzy and Slocum              
was, as a matter of law, objectively reasonable and legally               
justified.  Consequently, it cannot form the basis of a viable            
claim for common law assault or battery.                                  

VIII. False Imprisonment.                                                 

Next, Velez alleges that Officers Eutzy and Slocum, as well          
as Sergeant Seigle, without probable cause or other lawful                
basis, falsely imprisoned and/or wrongfully arrested him.  But,           
as already noted, the officers did have probable cause to arrest          


3    As noted in Amatucci, supra, the relevant portion of RSA             
627:5 provides that, “A law enforcement officer is justified in           
using non-deadly force upon another person when and to the                
extent that he reasonably believes it necessary to effect an              
arrest or detention or to prevent the escape from custody of an           
arrested or detained person, unless he knows that the arrest or           
detention is illegal.”                                                    
Velez.  And, as this court has observed, “Probable cause is an            
absolute bar to a claim of false arrest asserted under the                
Fourth Amendment and section 1983.”  Donovan v. Mahoney, No. 22-          

CV-215-JL, 2023 WL 3233954, at *4 (D.N.H. Apr. 13, 2023), report          
and recommendation adopted, No. 22-CV-215-JL, 2023 WL 3229970             
(D.N.H. May 3, 2023)(quoting Dollard v. Whisenand, 946 F.3d 342,          
353 (7th Cir. 2019)).  See also Finamore v. Miglionico, 15 F.4th          
52, 58 (1st Cir. 2021).                                                   

But, Velez advances his false imprisonment claim under New           
Hampshire common law, rather than the Fourth Amendment.  To               
prevail, he must demonstrate that:                                        

(1) the defendant acted with the intent of confining                 
him within boundaries fixed by the defendant; (2) the                
defendant’s act directly or indirectly resulted in the               
plaintiff’s confinement; (3) the plaintiff was                       
conscious of or harmed by the confinement; and (4) the               
defendant acted without legal authority.                             


Ojo v. Lorenzo, 164 N.H. 717, 726 (2013) (citations omitted)              
(emphasis supplied).  While the lack of probable cause is not an          
element of such a claim, the presence of probable cause “is a             
defense to a claim for false imprisonment resulting from a                
warrantless detention.”  Id. at 727.  Consequently, even though           
Velez’s claim sounds in state common law, it fares no better              
than one brought under the Fourth Amendment: the existence of             
probable cause to arrest Velez defeats any common law claim of            
false imprisonment.                                                       


IX.  Common Law Failure to Train.                                         
Finally, Velez alleges that the City of Manchester is                
liable to him under New Hampshire’s common law for its alleged            
failure to properly train and supervise it police officers.               
According to Velez, “Eutzy and Slocum negligently and unlawfully          
carried out their duties,” thereby demonstrating “that there are          
no guardrails at MPD for scofflaw officers who assault                    
undeserving individuals with impunity.”  Plaintiff’s Opposition           
Memorandum at 37, 38.                                                     

New Hampshire common law recognizes a duty on the part of            
employers to exercise reasonable care in the hiring, retention,           

supervision, and training of their employees.  See Sheriff v.             
Four Cousins Burgers & Fries of NH, LLC, No. 21-CV-571-PB, 2023           
WL 6976489, at *5 (D.N.H. Oct. 23, 2023).  See also Cutter v.             
Town of Farmington, 126 N.H. 836, 841 (1985); Marquay v. Eno,             
139 N.H. 708, 718–19 (1995).  But, of course, to have a viable            
claim against an employer (the city), the plaintiff must                  
necessarily have suffered some cognizable wrong or injury at the          
hands of one of its employees (the police officer).  As                   
discussed earlier, however, none of the defendant police                  
officers committed any legal wrong against, or caused any                 
unlawful injury to, Velez.                                                


Moreover, as to Velez’s common law “failure to train”                
claim, the City of Manchester is entitled to discretionary                
function immunity.  “Because decisions about training and                 
supervision of police officers involve a high degree of                   
discretion, the city of [Manchester] is immune from liability             
under New Hampshire’s doctrine of discretionary function                  
immunity.”  Jacobson v. City of Nashua, No. CIV. 01-165-B, 2002           
WL 1349515, at *6 (D.N.H. June 19, 2002) (citing Hacking v. Town          
of Belmont, 143 N.H. 546, 549–51 (1999)).  See also Austin v.             
Town of Brookline, No. 00-284-JD, 2001 WL 1117103, at *7 (D.N.H.          
Sept. 21, 2001) (a municipality’s “decisions regarding training           
and supervision of employees are discretionary decisions                  

entitled to immunity.”).  See generally Maryea v. Velardi, 168            
N.H. 633 (2016) (discussing the history and scope of New                  
Hampshire’s municipal discretionary function immunity).                   

                      Conclusion                                     
For the forgoing reasons, as well as those set forth in              
defendants’ legal memoranda (documents no. 15-1 and 23),                  
defendants’ Motion for Summary Judgment (document no. 15) is              
granted as to all counts advanced in Velez’s complaint.  The              
Clerk  of  Court  shall  enter  judgment  in  accordance  with  this 
order  and  close  the  case. 

 SO  ORDERED. 

                                                           _—— 
                                      teven   @.  McAuliffe 
                                     United  States  District  Judge 
June  12,  2024 
ec:   Counsel  of  Record 

                                 41