USDC SDNY 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                   □□□      agen 
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                DOCH:               — 
VOLOKH, et al.,                                     DATE FILED; _ 4/30/2024 
                        Plaintiffs, 
                                                       22-cv-10195 (ALC) 
                    -against- 
                                                       OPINION AND ORDER 
JAMES, 
                        Defendant. 
ANDREW L. CARTER, JR., United States District Judge: 
      The Court considers herein Plaintiffs’ motion to enforce the prior preliminary injunction 
against the Attorney General of the State of New York.  For the reasons stated herein, the Court 
DENIES Plaintiffs’ motion. 
                               BACKGROUND 
 I.    Procedural Background 
      Plaintiffs filed their Complaint against Defendant on December 1, 2022 and their initial 
motion for preliminary injunction on December 6, 2022.  ECF Nos. 1, 8.  Following a telephonic 
conference in which the Court heard argument on Plaintiffs’ motion for a preliminary injunction, 
Plaintiffs’ motion was granted.  ECF No. 29 (“PI Order”).  Defendant then filed an interlocutory 
appeal of this Court’s opinion and order granting the preliminary injunction and this Court stayed 
the present case.  See ECF Nos. 30, 37; Volok v. James, 23-356 (2d Cir. 2023).  The Second 
Circuit has held Defendant’s appeal in abeyance pending the Supreme Court’s decision in 
NetChoice LLLC v. Paxton, 144 S. Ct. 477 (2023).  Jd. at Dkt. 141.  Plaintiffs filed the present 
motion to enforce the preliminary injunction on December 1, 2023.  ECF No. 44; see also ECF 
No. 46 (“Mot.”).  Defendant filed their opposition on December 15, 2023.  ECF No. 50 (“Opp.”). 
Plaintiffs filed their reply memorandum on December 22, 2023.  ECF No. 51 (“Reply”). 

II.  Factual Background                                                  
    The Court presumes the Parties’ knowledge of the factual background underlying the 
Plaintiffs’ suit against the enforcement of the Hateful Conduct Law, N.Y. Gen. Bus. Law § 394-
ccc(1)(a), and recites only those fundamental facts relevant to the disposition of the instant 

motion.  For a more fulsome recitation of those background facts, the Court directs readers’ 
attention to its prior opinion granting the preliminary injunction at Volokh v. James, 656 F. Supp. 
3d 431, 436-438 (S.D.N.Y. 2023) (hereafter Volokh I).  See also PI Order at 2-5.  This law “has 
two main requirements: (1) a mechanism for social media users to file complaints about 
instances of "hateful conduct" and (2) disclosure of the social media network's policy for how it 
will respond to any such complaints” and “empowers the Attorney General to investigate 
violations of the law and provides for civil penalties for social media networks which knowingly 
fail to comply with the requirements.”  Volokh I at 438 (internal quotation marks omitted).   
    On October 12, 2023, following entry of the Court’s preliminary injunction barring 
enforcement of the Hateful Conduct law, Defendant James sent investigative letters to six social 

media networks including Plaintiff Rumble.  See ECF No. 47 (“Ortner Decl.”), Ex. A; Ex B.  In 
the letters, the Defendant references the state’s concerns of “growing reports of growing 
antisemitism and Islamaphobia [sic]” and “press reports that terrorist groups and individuals that 
sympathize with them are disseminating calls for violence and other materials that may incite 
violence against Jewish and Muslim people and institutions on social media platforms.” Id., Ex. 
A at 1.  Defendant then goes on to “request” that the recipients respond to a series of 
interrogatories in writing.  Id.  The letter asks recipients to state, inter alia, “[w]hat actions, if 
any [they] ha[ve] . . . taken to address the recent calls for violence against Jewish and Muslim 
people and institutions and the possibility that the Platform may be used to plan, encourage, or 
disseminate those acts,” to describe their “public-facing terms of service, community rules, . . . 
company-facing policies that govern the determination of whether content is a call for violence, . 
. . process for reviewing and removing calls for violence, . . . process for identifying and 
removing calls for violence, . . . methods for blocking the re-posting of content that has been 

removed, . . . [and] policies regarding disciplining, suspending, and/or banning users for posting 
content that has been removed.”  Id. at 1-2.  The letters made no mention of the Hateful Conduct 
Law and did not, by their text, compel response or disclosure or threaten the imposition of 
penalties for failure to respond.                                         
    On October 13, Defendant James stated at a press conference that “social media ha[d] 
been widely used by bad actors to spread horrific material, disseminate threats, and encourage 
violence,” that social media platforms “have a responsibility to keep their users safe and prohibit 
the spread of violent rhetoric that puts vulnerable groups in danger,” and “call[ed] on . . . 
companies to explain how they are addressing threats and how they will ensure that no online 
platform is used to further terrorist activities.”  Ortner Decl., Ex. C at 1.  The press release 

discussing the letters also referenced the prior “consistent[] action[s]” Defendant James has 
undertaken “to hold social media companies accountable and limit dangerous material from 
spreading online.”  Id. at 2.  None of the listed prior consistent actions reference the Defendant’s 
enforcement of the Hateful Conduct Law.                                   
    Plaintiff social media network Rumble objected in writing to the letter and demanded, in 
response, that the Defendant rescind the letters on the grounds that they violated the terms of the 
preliminary injunction.  Ortner Decl. Ex. D.  Defendant’s Office responded, noting their 
“wholehearted[] disagree[ment]” with Plaintiffs’ analysis, and withdrew the letter because 
“Rumble ha[d] already provided its content-moderation policies.”  Id. at Ex. E.   
                        LEGAL STANDARD                                   
    “A motion to enforce is an appropriate procedural vehicle for parties to seek compliance 
with a court order.”  United States v. Visa U.S.A., Inc., 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 42133, at *3 
(S.D.N.Y. June 7, 2007) (citing Pena v. New York State Div. for Youth, 708 F.2d 877 (2d Cir. 

1983)).  “[A] finding of contempt is not a prerequisite for enforcement.”  Id. (citing Berger v. 
Heckler, 771 F.2d 1556, 1569 (2d Cir. 1985)).  “Although contempt standards may be 
appropriate where sanctions are sought or imposed . . . such is not the case here.”  Id. (collecting 
cases).  A movant seeking enforcement of a preliminary injunction must establish the non-
movant’s failure to abide by the injunction by a preponderance of the evidence.  Id.; see also 
United States SEC v. Collector's Coffee, Inc., 2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 24482, at *22 (S.D.N.Y. 
Feb. 10, 2022) (“A motion to enforce may be granted where it is shown by a preponderance of 
the evidence that a court order has been violated . . . and is granted even where there is no 
finding that a party has acted contemptuously.”) (internal citations and quotation marks omitted). 
                          DISCUSSION                                     

    Plaintiffs’ have failed to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the Attorney 
General has violated this Court’s prior injunction of enforcement of the Hateful Conduct Law.  
The Hateful Conduct Law compels certain forms of non-commercial speech from social media 
networks, grants the Attorney General investigative authority into potential violations, and 
imposes civil penalties for those networks which fail to comply.  See Volokh I at 438.  By 
granting Plaintiffs’ requested preliminary injunction against enforcement of the law, the Attorney 
General was enjoined from taking any such action constituting the compulsion of speech, 
initiation of coercive investigation, or seeking imposition of civil penalties.  The interrogatory 
letters, by their own text, make no reference to the Hateful Conduct Law or its enforcement and 
do not mandate any response at all or threaten the imposition of penalties for failure to respond.  
What’s more, the issuance of such voluntary interrogatories falls within the ambit of authority 
granted to the Attorney General by statutes outside of the Hateful Conduct Law. 
I.  Whether the Interrogatory Letters Were Coercive                      

    As Defendant argues, the interrogatory letters were voluntary and did not constitute 
enforcement of the enjoined law.  Plaintiffs’ argument that response was not voluntary is 
unconvincing.  In determining whether a public official’s speech is coercive, district courts must 
consider the speech’s tone and content, Zieper v. Metzinger, 474 F.3d 60, 66 (2d Cir. 2007), 
whether the official has “regulatory or other direct decisionmaking authority,” Okwedy v. 
Molinari, 333 F.3d 339, 343 (2d Cir. 2003), whether the perceived threat had a “demonstrable” 
impact, Rattner v. Netburn, 930 F.2d 204, 210 (2d Cir. 1991), and whether the speech “referred to 
. . . adverse consequences that might be suffered.”  Hammerhead Enters. v. Brezenoff, 707 F.2d 
33, 39 (2d Cir. 1983).  While government actors may express the policy positions which they 
“plainly favor” and “s[eek] to convince . . . regulated entities” to pursue, that government speech 

which is “written in an evenhanded, nonthreatening tone and employed words intended to 
persuade rather than intimidate” does not constitute an attempt to coerce.  NRA of Am. v. Vullo, 
49 F.4th 700, 717 (2d Cir. 2022) (internal citations omitted); see also id. (stating that a lack of 
references “to any pending investigations or possible regulatory action” and allusions to de 
minimis reputational “adverse consequences” are insufficient to constitute coercion).  So long as 
“[t]he statements did not intimate that some form of punishment or adverse regulatory action 
would follow the failure to accede to the request,” no coercion has occurred.  Id. (citing 
Hammerhead Enters. v. Brezenoff, 707 F.2d 33, 39 (2d Cir. 1983)) (cleaned up).   
    At the outset, the Court notes that it is “clearly the case” that the Attorney General has 
regulatory authority over Plaintiffs.  Missouri v. Biden, 83 F.4th 350, 384 (5th Cir. 2023).  Of 
course, that fact is not outcome-determinative.  See NRA of Am. v. Vullo, 49 F.4th 700, 717 (2d 
Cir. 2022).  Nothing in the Attorney General’s statements to the press or statements contained 

within the interrogatory letters makes any reference to adverse consequences.  Defendant makes 
much of the press releases’ reference to Defendant’s “consistent[] . . . action[s] to hold social 
media companies accountable and limit dangerous material from spreading online” but tellingly 
fails to note that such actions are stated to include: (1) the advancement of legislation unrelated 
to this present action, (2) leadership in a multistate coalition unrelated to this present action, (3) 
the release of a report “on the role social media platforms played in the Buffalo mass shooting 
and online extremism,” and (4) enrollment in a multistate coalition unrelated to this present 
action.  Ortner Decl., Ex. C at 2-3.  These statements could not reasonably be read to constitute 
threats of adverse consequences to Plaintiffs and those similarly situated akin to that 
contemplated by the Hateful Conduct Law.                                  

    The interrogatory letters similarly make no reference at all to any adverse consequences.  
While the interrogatory letters themselves did ask recipients to describe certain policies in detail 
within eight days of the letter’s issuance, they did not do so in a manner which indicated 
“persisten[ce] [or] urgen[cy].”  Missouri v. Biden, 83 F.4th 350, 383 (5th Cir. 2023).  Plaintiff 
does not allege that Defendant’s office sent any follow-ups to the interrogatories.  Rather, the 
record establishes that Defendant rescinded the interrogatory letter upon Plaintiff Rumble’s 
adversarial response.  ECF No. 49 at Ex. 8.                               
    Plaintiffs’ attempts to construe the letters’ tone as “confrontational and aggressive” is 
unsupported by the letters’ text.  Reply at 6.  Defendant expressly phrased the letters’ 
interrogatories as a “request” rather than a demand or order.  Ortner Decl., Ex. A at 1.  The 
letters’ statement that the Attorney General “would like to better understand” how networks are 
“ensuring” that their platforms are “not being used to incite violence and further terrorist 
activities” does not constitute an accusation that Plaintiffs are fostering such conduct.  Id.  

Plaintiff also fails to make any allegation that the letters had any impact on the recipient social 
media networks at all.  See Missouri v. Biden, 83 F.4th 350, 383 (5th Cir. 2023) (noting that “it is 
more likely to be coercive if there is some evidence that the recipient's subsequent conduct is 
linked to the official's message”).                                       
II.  Whether the Attorney General Had Other Statutory Authority to Issue Such Letters 
    Plaintiffs’ argument that the Attorney General had no other statutory authority under 
which to issue these letters is also similarly unavailing.  Defendant’s opposition brief presents 
several statutory grants of power under which the issuance of such letters might be permissible 
including, but not limited to, N.Y. Exec. L. § 63(8), N.Y. Civ. R. L. § 79-n(3), N.Y. C.P.L.R. 
§2302.  N.Y. Exec L. § 63(8) states, in relevant part, the following:     

    Whenever in his judgment the public interest requires it, the attorney-general may, 
    with the approval of the governor, and when directed by the governor, shall, 
    inquire into matters concerning the public peace, public safety and public justice. . 
    . . The attorney-general, his deputy, or other officer, designated by him, is 
    empowered to subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance, examine them under 
    oath before himself or a magistrate and require that any books, records, 
    documents or papers relevant or material to the inquiry be turned over to him for 
    inspection, examination or audit, pursuant to the civil practice law and rules. If a 
    person subpoenaed to attend upon such inquiry fails to obey the command of a 
    subpoena without reasonable cause, or if a person in attendance upon such inquiry 
    shall, without reasonable cause, refuse to be sworn or to be examined or to answer 
    a question or to produce a book or paper, when ordered so to do by the officer 
    conducting such inquiry, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. It shall be the duty 
    of all public officers, their deputies, assistants and subordinates, clerks and 
    employees, and all other persons, to render and furnish to the attorney-general, his 
    deputy or other designated officer, when requested, all information and assistance 
    in their possession and within their power. . . . Any officer participating in such 
    inquiry and any person examined as a witness upon such inquiry who shall 
    disclose to any person other than the governor or the attorney-general the name of 
    any witness examined or any information obtained upon such inquiry, except as 
    directed by the governor or the attorney-general, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
    While the statute’s direct predecessor was enacted “because of [the] war emergency” 
during World War I, the New York Court of Appeals has expressly stated on numerous occasions 
that the statute’s applicability was “not[] either expressly or by implication[] limit[ed] . . . to a 
time of war.”  In re Di Brizzi, 303 N.Y. 206, 214, 101 N.E.2d 464, 468 (1951).  Since its 
enactment, the New York Court of Appeals has stated that § 63(8) permits the Attorney General 
to issue subpoenas upon nursing home facilities due to, inter alia, “the State’s recognized 
responsibility for the care of the elderly,” Friedman v. Hi-Li Manor Home for Adults, 42 N.Y.2d 
408, 414, 397 N.Y.S.2d 967, 970, 366 N.E.2d 1322, 1325 (1977) (citing Sigety v. Hynes, 38 
N.Y.2d 260, 379 N.Y.S.2d 724, 342 N.E.2d 518 (1975), as well as “an individual witness’ 
testimony in relation to organized crime.”  N.Y. Republican State Comm. v. N.Y. State Com. on 
Gov't Integrity, 138 Misc. 2d 790, 795, 525 N.Y.S.2d 527, 531 (Sup. Ct. 1988) (citing Friedman, 
42 N.Y.2d at 414); see also In re Di Brizzi, 303 N.Y. 206.  While the state high court’s decision in 
Friedman encouraged “the enactment of specific, ad hoc legislative authority for particular 

inquiries,” rather than sweeping reliance upon § 63(8), 42 N.Y.2d at 414, the Court of Appeals 
later clarified that these statements “suggested” a “preferable approach” and constituted dicta not 
core to the Court’s prior ruling.  Landau v. Hynes, 49 N.Y.2d 128, 134, 424 N.Y.S.2d 380, 382, 
400 N.E.2d 321, 323 (1979) (citing Friedman, 42. N.Y.2d at 414) (internal quotation marks 
omitted).  Considering the weight of this precedent from the state high court, as well as 
contemporaneous intermediate state court decisions construing the authorizing statute as “having 
general application,” In re Carey, 68 A.D.2d 220, 224, 416 N.Y.S.2d 904, 907 (App. Div. 4th 
Dept. 1979), Plaintiffs’ attempts to cabin the Attorney General’s authority under § 63(8) to that of 
a “wartime emergency” power rings hollow.  Reply at 8; see also Sigety v. Abrams, 632 F.2d 969, 
970 n.1 (2d Cir. 1980) (stating that § 63(8) “authorizes the attorney general to subpoena 
witnesses and require production of documents relevant to . . . inquir[ies]” related to “the public 
peace, public safety and public justice” without mention of any wartime constraints upon such 
authority).                                                               

    N.Y. Civ. R. L. § 79-n(3) of the New York Civil Rights Law states in relevant part: 
    Whenever there shall be a violation of this section, an application may be made 
    by the attorney general in the name of the people of the state of New York to a 
    court or justice having jurisdiction for an injunction to enjoin and restrain the 
    continuance of such activity. In connection with any such application, the attorney 
    general is authorized to take proof and determine the relevant facts and to issue 
    subpoenas in accordance with the civil practice law and rules.       
         Plaintiffs, without citing to supporting statute or case law, argue that the Attorney 
General’s issuance of voluntary interrogatory letters is impermissible under this grant of 
authority because those letters fail to identify a person or specific instance of harassment being 
investigated and does not utilize the statute’s language.  This Court is unable to identify any such 
constraints upon the Attorney General’s authority vis-à-vis voluntary requests whether in the 
statute’s text or elsewhere.  Rather, § 79-n(3)’s plain text grants the Attorney General authority to 
issue such voluntary interrogatory letters.                               
                          CONCLUSION                                     
    Taken all together, the Attorney General has issued non-coercive interrogatory letters 
pursuant to at least one independent statutory authority unrelated to the Hateful Conduct Law in 
a manner which does not maintain any of the trappings constituting enforcement of the enjoined 
law.  The Defendant has not compelled any speech or levied or threatened to levy penalties upon 
the letters’ recipients.  For the reasons stated herein, the Court denies Plaintiffs’ motion to 
enforce the preliminary injunction as to the Attorney General’s issuance of voluntary 
interrogatory letters to regulated social media networks for failure to establish Defendant’s 
failure to abide by this Court’s preliminary injunction by a preponderance of the evidence.  The 
Court has considered the Parties’ remaining arguments and finds them insufficient to make the 
requisite showing.  The Clerk of the Court is respectfully directed to terminate the motions at 
ECF Nos. 44 and 45. 

SO ORDERED. 
Dated:   April 30, 2024                     [Ards   □ (hee 
       New York, New York                                                  
                                     ANDREW    CARTER, JR. 
                                              United States District  Judge

---

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                                              
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                                             
EUGENE VOLOKH, LOCALS                                                    
TECHNOLOGY INC. and RUMBLE                                               
CANADA INC.,                                                             
                    Plaintiffs,                                          
                                       22-CV-10195 (ALC)                 
             -against-                                                   
                                       OPINION AND ORDER                 
LETITIA JAMES, in her official capacity as                               
New York Attorney General,                                               
                    Defendant.                                           
ANDREW L. CARTER, JR., United States District Judge:                      
    “Speech that demeans on the basis of race, ethnicity, gender, religion, age, disability, or 
any other similar ground is hateful; but the proudest boast of our free speech jurisprudence is that 
we protect the freedom to express ‘the thought that we hate.’”  Matal v. Tam, 137 S. Ct. 1744, 
1764 (2017) (citations omitted).                                          
    With the well-intentioned goal of providing the public with clear policies and mechanisms 
to facilitate reporting hate speech on social media, the New York State legislature enacted N.Y. 
Gen. Bus. Law § 394-ccc (“the Hateful Conduct Law” or “the law”).   Yet, the First Amendment 
protects from state regulation speech that may be deemed “hateful” and generally disfavors 
regulation of speech based on its content unless it is narrowly tailored to serve a compelling 
governmental interest.  The Hateful Conduct Law both compels social media networks to speak 
about the contours of hate speech and chills the constitutionally protected speech of social media 
users, without articulating a compelling governmental interest or ensuring that the law is narrowly 
tailored to that goal.  In the face of our national commitment to the free expression of speech, even 
where  that  speech  is  offensive  or  repugnant,  Plaintiffs’  motion  for  preliminary  injunction, 
prohibiting enforcement of the law, is GRANTED.                           
                            BACKGROUND                                   
 I.  Factual Background                                                  

    The following facts are drawn from the Complaint, Plaintiffs’ declaration in support of 
their motion for preliminary injunction, and Defendant’s declaration in opposition to the motion, 
and the documents relied upon therein.                                    
      A.  The Plaintiffs                                                 
    Plaintiffs  Eugene  Volokh  (“Volokh”),  Rumble  Canada  Inc.  (“Rumble”)  and  Locals 
Technology Inc. (“Locals”) operate online platforms that they believe are subject to the law as a 
“social medial network” as defined by the law.  Plaintiff Volokh is a California resident and the 
co-owner and operator of the Volokh Conspiracy, a legal blog.  (Compl., ECF No. 1 ¶ 12.)  Plaintiff 
Rumble, headquartered in Toronto, Canada, operates a website “similar to YouTube” which 
“allows independent creators to upload and share video content”.  (Id. ¶ 13.)  Rumble has a “pro-

free speech purpose” and its “mission [is] ‘to protect a free and open internet’ and to ‘create 
technologies that are immune to cancel culture.’’  (Id.)  Plaintiff Locals is a subsidiary of Rumble 
Inc. and operates a website that allows “creators to communicate and share content directly with 
unpaid and paid subscribers.”  (Id. ¶ 14.)  Locals also has a stated “pro-free speech purpose” and 
a “mission of being ‘committed to fostering a community that is safe, respectful, and dedicated to 
the free exchange of ideas.’”  (Id.)                                      
      B.  The Buffalo Mass Shooting                                      
    On May 14, 2022, an avowed white supremacist used Twitch, a social media platform, to 
livestream himself perpetrating a racially motivated mass shooting on Black shoppers at a grocery 
store in Buffalo, New York.  (Sawyer Decl., ECF No. 20 ¶ 4; id., Ex. A, ECF No. 20-1 at 34.)  The 
attack left ten people dead and three wounded.  (Id.)  Shortly thereafter, a recording of the mass 
shooting “went viral” and was re-posted on several websites, including 4chan and Reddit.  (Id.)  A 
manifesto expressing the shooter’s racist ideology was also shared on social media.  (Id. at 15–16, 

34.)                                                                      
    In response to the mass shooting, Governor Kathy Hochul issued a referral letter to the 
Office of the Attorney General (“OAG”), directing it to investigate the events surrounding the 
shooting, focusing on “the specific online platforms that were used to broadcast and amplify the 
acts and intentions of the mass shooting[.]”  (Id. at 6; Compl., ECF No. 1 ¶ 38.)  Governor Hochul 
also directed the OAG to “investigate various online platforms for ‘civil or criminal liability for 
their role in promoting, facilitating, or providing a platform to plan or promote violence.”  (Id.) 
    On October 18, 2022, the OAG released a report detailing its findings.  (Sawyer Decl., ECF 
No. 20 ¶ 3.)  In the associated press release, Defendant stated that “[o]nline platforms should be 
held accountable for allowing hateful and dangerous content to spread on their platforms” because 

an alleged “lack of oversight, transparency, and accountability of these platforms allows hateful 
and extremist views to proliferate online.”  (Compl., ECF No. 1 ¶ 3.)     
      C. The Hateful Conduct Law                                         
    The Hateful Conduct Law, entitled “Social media networks; hateful conduct prohibited” 
went into effect on December 3, 2022.  The law applies to “Social media network(s)”1, and defines 
“Hateful conduct” as:                                                     

1“Social media network” is defined as “service providers, which, for profit-making purposes, 
operate internet platforms that are designed to enable users to share any content with other users 
or to make such content available to the public.”  N.Y. Gen. Bus. Law § 394-ccc(1)(b).  
Defendant does not challenge Plaintiffs’ assertion that they have standing to sue, but Defendant 
reserves the right to do so in the future.  (Def.’s Opp’n, ECF No. 21 at 6, n.3.) 
         “[T]he use of a social media network to vilify, humiliate, or incite 
         violence against a group or a class of persons on the basis of race, 
         color,  religion,  ethnicity,  national  origin,  disability,  sex,  sexual 
         orientation, gender identity or gender expression.”             

N.Y. Gen. Bus. Law § 394-ccc(1)(a).  Thus, the Hateful Conduct Law requires that social media 
networks create a complaint mechanism for three types of “conduct”: (1) conduct that vilifies; 
(2) conduct that humiliates; and (3) conduct that incites violence.  (Id.)  This “conduct” falls within 
the law’s definition if it is aimed at an individual or group based on their “race”, “color”, “religion”, 
“ethnicity”, “national origin”, “disability”, “sex”, “sexual” orientation”, “gender identity” or 
“gender expression”.  Id.                                                 
    The Hateful Conduct Law has two main requirements: (1) a mechanism for social media 
users to file complaints about instances of “hateful conduct” and (2) disclosure of the social media 
network’s policy for how it will respond to any such complaints.  First, the law requires a social 
media network to “provide and maintain a clear and easily accessible mechanism for individual 
users to report incidents of hateful conduct.”  This mechanism must “be clearly accessible to users 
of such network and easily accessed from both a social media networks’ application and website. 
. . .” and must “allow the social media network to provide a direct response to any individual 
reporting hateful conduct informing them of how the matter is being handled.”  N.Y. Gen. Bus. 
Law § 394-ccc(2).                                                         
    Second, a social media network must “have a clear and concise policy readily available 
and accessible on their website and application. . . ”  N.Y. Gen. Bus. Law § 394-ccc(3).  This 
policy must “include[] how such social media network will respond and address the reports of 
incidents of hateful conduct on their platform.”  N.Y. Gen. Bus. Law § 394-ccc(3). 
    The law also empowers the Attorney General to investigate violations of the law and 
provides for civil penalties for social media networks which “knowingly fail[] to comply” with the 
requirements.  N.Y. Gen. Bus. Law § 394-ccc(5).                           
 II. Procedural History                                                  

    This action was commenced by Plaintiffs on December 1, 2022.  (Compl., ECF No. 1.)  
The Complaint alleges both facial and as-applied challenges to the Hateful Conduct Law, arguing 
that it violates the First Amendment because it: (1) is a content and viewpoint-based regulation of 
speech; (2) is overbroad; and (3) is void for vagueness.  (See generally id.)  Plaintiffs also allege 
that the law is preempted by the Communications Decency Act, 47 U.S.C. § 230.  (Id.) 
    Plaintiffs filed their motion for preliminary injunction on December 6, 2022, arguing that 
(1) Plaintiffs have a well-founded fear that the law will be enforced against their online platforms 
and (2) they are likely to prevail on the merits because the law burdens and compels speech, is 
overbroad, void for vagueness, and preempted by the Communications Decency Act.  (Mot., ECF 
No. 8; see generally Pl.’s Mem., ECF No. 9.)  Defendant filed a memorandum in opposition on 

December 13, 2022, arguing that Plaintiffs are unlikely to succeed on the merits of their claims 
because, inter alia, the law does not target protected expression based on content or viewpoint, is 
not substantially overbroad or vague, and is not preempted.  (See generally Def.’s Opp’n, ECF No. 
21.)                                                                      
    The Court heard oral argument on the motion on December 19, 2022.  (See Dec. 19, 2022 
“Tr.”, ECF No. 27.)                                                       
                       LEGAL STANDARD                                    
    To obtain a preliminary injunction, the movant must show “a likelihood of success on the 
merits, a likelihood of irreparable harm in the absence of preliminary relief, that the balance of 
equities tips in the party’s favor, and that an injunction is in the public interest.”  ACLU v. Clapper, 
804 F.3d 617, 622 (2d Cir. 2015) (citing Winter v. NRDC, 555 U.S. 7, 20 (2008)).  However, “a 
preliminary injunction is an extraordinary and drastic remedy, one that should not be granted 
unless the movant, by a clear showing, carries the burden of persuasion.”  Sussman v. Crawford, 

488 F.3d 136, 139 (2d Cir. 2007); see also Anwar v. Fairfield Greenwich Ltd., 728 F. Supp. 2d 
462, 472 (S.D.N.Y. 2010) (“Temporary restraining orders and preliminary injunctions are among 
the most drastic tools in the arsenal of judicial remedies, and must be used with great care.”) 
(internal citations omitted).                                             
                          DISCUSSION                                     
 I.  Irreparable Harm                                                    
    Although a showing of irreparable harm is typically the “single most important prerequisite 
for the issuance of a preliminary injunction,” Faiveley Transp. Malmo AB v. Wabtec Corp., 559 
F.3d  110,  118  (2d  Cir.  2009)  (citation  omitted),  “[c]onsideration  of  the  merits  is  virtually 
indispensable in the First Amendment context, where the likelihood of success on the merits is the 

dominant, if not the dispositive, factor.”  N.Y. Progress and Prot. PAC v. Walsh, 733 F.3d 483, 
488 (2d Cir. 2013).  Accordingly, the Court’s analysis will focus on the second prong of the 
preliminary injunction analysis.                                          
 II. Likelihood of Success on the Merits                                 
    Where, as is the case here, the injunction being sought will provide the plaintiff with 
substantially all the relief sought in the complaint, the plaintiff must demonstrate a “clear or 
substantial likelihood of success on the merits.”  Yang v. Kosinski, 960 F.3d 119, 127–28 (2d Cir. 
2020) (internal citations and quotations omitted).                        
    For the reasons set out more fully below, the Court finds that Plaintiffs have demonstrated 
a substantial likelihood of success on the merits of their First Amendment claims, but not on their 
preemption claim.                                                         
      A.  Plaintiffs’ As-Applied First Amendment Challenge               

         i.   The Legal Framework for the First Amendment                
    “The First Amendment generally prevents government from proscribing speech…or even 
expressive conduct…because of disapproval of the ideas expressed.  R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, 
Minn.,  505  U.S.  377,  382  (1992)  (internal  citations  and  quotations  omitted).    “The  First 
Amendment reflects “a profound national commitment to the principle that debate on public issues 
should be uninhibited, robust, and wide-open.”  Snyder v. Phelps, 562 U.S. 443, 452 (2011).  Thus, 
as is relevant to the current facts, “[a]s a Nation we have chosen . . . to protect even hurtful speech 
on public issues to ensure that we do not stifle public debate.”  Id. at 461.  This protection extends 
to speech which the government may seek to limit because it is offensive or insulting.  See R.A.V, 
505 U.S. at 391 (“The First Amendment does not permit [the government] to impose special 

prohibitions on those speakers who express views on disfavored subjects.”)  Even regulations that 
seek to regulate speech “that insult[s], or provoke[s] violence, on the basis of race, color, creed, 
religion, or gender” have been found to run afoul of the First Amendment because they constitute 
content and viewpoint-based regulation of protected speech.  Id. at 391–92. 
    In evaluating whether a regulation violates the First Amendment, courts “distinguish 
between content-based and content-neutral regulations of speech.”  Id.  “Content-based laws—
those that target speech based on its communicative content—are presumptively unconstitutional 
and may be justified only if the government proves that they are narrowly tailored to serve 
compelling  state  interests.”    Reed  v.  Town  of  Gilbert,  Ariz.,  576  U.S.  155,  163  (2015).  
“Government regulation of speech is content based if a law applies to particular speech because of 
the topic discussed or the idea or message expressed.”  Id.  Additionally, when “a state compels 
an individual to speak a particular message, the state alters the content of their speech, and engages 
in content-based regulation.”  CompassCare v. Cuomo, 465 F. Supp. 3d 122, 155 (N.D.N.Y. 2020) 

(quoting Nat’l Inst. of Fam. & Life Advocs. v. Becerra, 138 S. Ct. 2361, 2371 (2018) (“NIFLA”) 
(internal quotations and alterations omitted)).                           
         ii.  Whether the Hateful Conduct Law Compels Speech             
    Plaintiffs argue that the law regulates the content of their speech by compelling them to 
speak on an issue on which they would otherwise remain silent.  (Pl.’s Mem., ECF No. 9 at 12; 
Tr., ECF No. 27 at 47:5–13.)  Defendant argues that the law regulates conduct, as opposed to 
speech, because there is no requirement for how a social media network must respond to any 
complaints and because the law does not even require the network to specifically respond to a 
complaint of hateful content.  (Def.’s Opp’n, ECF No. 21 at 9.)  Instead, the law merely requires 
that the complaint mechanism allows the network to respond, if that is the social media network’s 

policy.  (Tr., ECF No. 27 at 11:25–1212:4.)                               
    Defendant likens the Hateful Conduct Law to the regulation upheld in Restaurant Law Ctr. 
v. City of New York, which required fast-food employers to set up a mechanism for their employees 
to donate a portion of their paychecks to a non-profit of that employee’s choosing.  360 F. Supp. 
3d 192 (S.D.N.Y. 2019).  The court found that this did not constitute “speech”—nor did it 
constitute  “compelled  speech”—noting  that  the  “ministerial  act”  of  administering  payroll 
deductions on behalf of their employees did not constitute speech for the employers.  Id. at 214.  
As such, the court applied rational basis review and found that the regulation passed muster.  Id. 
at 221.                                                                   
    However, those facts are not applicable here.  The Hateful Conduct Law does not merely 
require that a social media network provide its users with a mechanism to complain about instances 
of “hateful conduct”.  The law also requires that a social media network must make a “policy” 
available on its website which details how the network will respond to a complaint of hateful 

content.  In other words, the law requires that social media networks devise and implement a 
written policy—i.e., speech.                                              
    For this reason, the Hateful Conduct Law is analogous to the state mandated notices that 
were found not to withstand constitutional muster by the Supreme Court and the Second Circuit: 
NIFLA and Evergreen.  In NIFLA, the Supreme Court found that plaintiffs—crisis pregnancy 
centers opposing abortion—were likely to succeed on the merits of their First Amendment claim 
challenging a California law requiring them to disseminate notices stating the existence of family-
planning services (including abortions and contraception).  NIFLA, 138 S. Ct. at 2371.  The Court 
emphasized that “[b]y compelling individuals to speak a particular message, such notices ‘alte[r] 
the content of [their] speech.’”  Id. (quoting Riley v. National Federation of Blind of N. C., Inc., 

487 U.S. 781, 795 (1988)).  Likewise, in Evergreen, the Second Circuit held that a state-mandated 
disclosure requirement for crisis pregnancy centers impermissibly burdened the plaintiffs’ First 
Amendment rights because it required them to “affirmatively espouse the government’s position 
on a contested public issue….”  Ass’n, Inc. v. City of New York, 740 F.3d 233, 250 (2d Cir. 2014) 
(quoting Alliance for Open Soc’y Int’l, Inc. v. U.S. Agency for Int’l Dev., 651 F.3d 218, 236 (2d 
Cir. 2011), aff'd, 570 U.S. 205 (2013)).                                  
    Similarly, the Hateful Conduct Law requires a social media network to endorse the state’s 
message about “hateful conduct”.  To be in compliance with the law’s requirements, a social media 
network must make a “concise policy readily available and accessible on their website and 
application” detailing how the network will “respond and address the reports of incidents of hateful 
conduct on their platform.”  N.Y. Gen. Bus. Law § 394-ccc(3).  Implicit in this language is that 
each social media network’s definition of “hateful conduct” must be at least as inclusive as the 
definition set forth in the law itself.  In other words, the social media network’s policy must define 

“hateful conduct” as conduct which tends to “vilify, humiliate, or incite violence” “on the basis of 
race, color, religion, ethnicity, national origin, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity 
or gender expression.”  N.Y. Gen. Bus. Law § 394-ccc(1)(a).  A social media network that devises 
its own definition of “hateful conduct” would risk being in violation of the law and thus subject to 
its enforcement provision.                                                
    The gap between the state’s definition of “hateful conduct” and other potential definitions 
is illustrated by Plaintiffs’ own current content moderation policies.  For instance, Rumble reserves 
the right to unilaterally remove any content that it deems is:            
         “a) is illegal; b) is pornographic, obscene, or of an adult or sexual 
         nature; c) is grossly offensive to the online community, including 
         but not limited to, racism, anti-semitism and hatred; d) supports or 
         incites violence or unlawful acts; e) supports groups that support or 
         incite  violence  or  unlawful  acts;  or  f)  promotes  terrorist 
         organizations.”                                                 

(Compl., ECF No. 1 ¶ 116 (internal quotations omitted).)  The policy does not explicitly pertain to 
content that vilifies or humiliates, as is defined in the law, and does not explicitly apply to content 
aimed at a person or group’s “religion”, “disability”, “sexual orientation” or “gender expression”, 
as is expressly enumerated in the Hateful Conduct Law.  For Rumble to be in compliance with the 
law, it would need to publish a policy expressly indicating that its users have a mechanism to 
complain about the “hateful conduct” as defined by the Hateful Conduct Law, not removable 
content as defined by Rumble.                                             
    Likewise, Locals’ website identifies a few categories of content that it may remove from 
its website, including content that “threatens violence against an individual or group of people.”  
(Id. ¶ 133.)  However, this policy also does not encapsulate the classes of groups or persons to 
whom “hateful conduct” may be directed as is defined by the New York legislature, and it would 

need to be modified to be brought into compliance with the law by including speech that potentially 
vilifies or humiliates a group or individual.  To be in compliance with the law, Locals would need 
to publish a policy detailing the types of content its users are entitled to complain about through 
the new mechanism—i.e., “hateful conduct” as defined by the law—thus compelling Locals to 
endorse the state’s definition of that term.                              
    Clearly, the law, at a minimum, compels Plaintiffs to speak about “hateful conduct”.  As 
Plaintiffs  note,  this  compulsion  is  particularly  onerous  for  Plaintiffs,  whose  websites  have 
dedicated “pro-free speech purpose[s]” (Compl., ECF No. 1 ¶¶ 13, 14), which likely attract users 
who are “opposed to censorship” (Pl.’s Mem., ECF No. 9 at 24).  Requiring Plaintiffs to endorse 
the state’s definition of “hateful conduct”, forces them to weigh in on the debate about the contours 

of hate speech when they may otherwise choose not to speak.  In other words, the law, “deprives 
Plaintiffs of their right to communicate freely on matters of public concern” without state coercion.  
Evergreen,740 F.3d at 250.                                                
    Additionally, Plaintiffs have an editorial right to keep certain information off their websites 
and to make decisions as to the sort of community they would like to foster on their platforms.  It 
is well-established that a private entity has an ability to make “choices about whether, to what 
extent, and in what manner it will disseminate speech…”  NetChoice, LLC v. Att’y Gen., Fla., 34 
F.4th 1196, 1210 (11th Cir. 2022).  These choices constitute “editorial judgments” which are 
protected by the First Amendment.  Id. (collecting cases).  In Pacific Gas & Electric Co. v. Public 
Utilities Commission of California, the Supreme Court struck down a regulation that would have 
forced a utility company to include information about a third party in its billing envelopes because 
the regulation “require[d] appellant to use its property as a vehicle for spreading a message with 
which it disagrees.”  475 U.S. 1, 17 (1986).                              

    Here, the Hateful Conduct Law requires social media networks to disseminate a message 
about the definition of “hateful conduct” or hate speech—a fraught and heavily debated topic 
today.  Even though the Hateful Conduct Law ostensibly does not dictate what a social media 
website’s response to a complaint must be and does not even require that the networks respond to 
any complaints or take down offensive material, the dissemination of a policy about “hateful 
conduct” forces Plaintiffs to publish a message with which they disagree.  Thus, the Hateful 
Conduct Law places Plaintiffs in the incongruous position of stating that they promote an explicit 
“pro-free speech” ethos, but also requires them to enact a policy allowing users to complain about 
“hateful conduct” as defined by the state.                                
         iii.  Whether the Hateful Conduct Law Compels Commercial Speech 

    In the alternative, Defendant argues that even if the law is found to regulate speech, it only 
regulates commercial speech and should thus be subject to a lesser standard of review.  (Def.’s 
Opp’n, ECF No. 21 at 9, 12–13.)  Defendant characterizes the law’s requirement that social media 
networks publish a policy as “a truthful disclosure of fact” that is only subject to rational basis 
review.  (Tr., ECF No. 27 at 44:7–8.)  Defendant likens the Hateful Conduct Law’s policy 
requirement to other regulations upheld by the Second Circuit requiring (1) chain restaurants to 
post calorie content information for their menu items, New York State Rest. Ass’n v. New York City 
Bd. of Health, 556 F.3d 114, 137 (2d Cir. 2009), and (2) lightbulb manufacturers to disclose the 
mercury content in their products, Nat’l Elec. Mfrs. Ass’n v. Sorrell, 272 F.3d 104, 116 (2d Cir. 
2001).                                                                    
    In general, laws regulating commercial speech are subject to a lesser standard of scrutiny.  
N.Y. State Rest. Ass’n v. New York City Bd. of Health, No. 08-CV-1000(RJH), 2008 WL 1752455, 

at *6 (S.D.N.Y. Apr. 16, 2008), aff'd, 556 F.3d 114 (2d Cir. 2009) (citing Nat’l Elec. Mfrs. Ass’n 
v. Sorrell, 272 F.3d 104, 113 (2d Cir. 2001)).  The Supreme Court has articulated two definitions 
of what constitutes commercial speech.  First, speech is considered to be commercial when it 
“‘does no more than propose a commercial transaction.’”  Conn. Bar Ass’n v. United States, 620 
F.3d 81, 93 (2d Cir. 2010) (quoting Bolger v. Youngs Drug Prods. Corp., 463 U.S. 60, 66 (1983)).  
Second, “commercial speech [constitutes] ‘expression related solely to the economic interests of 
the speaker and its audience.’”  Conn. Bar Ass’n, 620 F.3d at 94 (quoting Cent. Hudson Gas & 
Elec. Corp. v. Pub. Serv. Comm’n of New York, 447 U.S. 557, 561 (1980)).  Commercial speech 
is generally subject to intermediate scrutiny, Safelite Grp., Inc. v. Jepsen, 764 F.3d 258, 261 (2d 
Cir. 2014); however, where the commercial speech conveys “purely factual and uncontroversial” 

information, courts apply rational basis review.  New York State Rest. Ass’n v. New York City Bd. 
of Health, 556 F.3d 114, 132 (2d Cir. 2009) (citing Nat’l Elec. Mfrs. Ass’n, 272 F.3d at 114–15). 
    The policy disclosure at issue here does not constitute commercial speech and conveys 
more than a “purely factual and uncontroversial” message.  The law’s requirement that Plaintiffs 
publish their policies explaining how they intend to respond to hateful content on their websites 
does not simply “propose a commercial transaction”.  Nor is the policy requirement “related solely 
to the economic interests of the speaker and its audience.”  Rather, the policy requirement compels 
a social media network to speak about the range of protected speech it will allow its users to engage 
(or not engage) in.  Plaintiffs operate websites that are directly engaged in the proliferation of 
speech—Volokh operates a legal blog, whereas Rumble and Locals operate platforms where users 
post video content and comment on other users’ videos.                    
    The “lodestars in deciding what level of scrutiny to apply to a compelled statement must 
be the nature of the speech taken as a whole and the effect of the compelled statement thereon.”  

Riley v. Nat’l Fed’n of the Blind of N. Carolina, Inc., 487 U.S. 781, 796 (1988).  Where speech is 
“inextricably intertwined with otherwise fully protected speech”, it does not retain any of its 
potential commercial character.  Id.  Here, the law clearly implicates protected speech—namely 
hate speech—by requiring a disclosure of the Plaintiffs’ policy for responding to complaints of 
hateful content.  This is different in character and kind from commercial speech and amounts to 
more than mere disclosure of factual information, such as caloric information or mercury content, 
as Defendant tries to equate.                                             
         iv.  Whether the Hateful Conduct Law Survives Strict Scrutiny   

    Because the Hateful Conduct Law regulates speech based on its content, the appropriate 
level of review is strict scrutiny.  See Evergreen, 740 F.3d at 244.  To satisfy strict scrutiny, a law 
must be “narrowly tailored to serve a compelling governmental interest.”  Amidon v. Student Ass’n 
of State Univ. of New York at Albany, 508 F.3d 94, 96 (2d Cir. 2007).  A statute is not narrowly 
tailored if “a less restrictive alternative would serve the Government’s purpose.”  United States v. 
Playboy Entm’t Grp., Inc., 529 U.S. 803, 813, (2000).                     
    Plaintiffs argue that limiting the free expression of protected speech is not a compelling 
state interest and that the law is not narrowly tailored.  While Defendant concedes that the Hateful 
Conduct Law may not be able to withstand strict scrutiny, she maintains that the state has a 
compelling interest in preventing mass shootings, such as the one that took place in Buffalo.  (Tr., 
ECF No. 27 at 45:1–15.)                                                   
    Although preventing and reducing the instances of hate-fueled mass shootings is certainly 
a compelling governmental interest, the law is not narrowly tailored toward that end.2  Banning 
conduct that incites violence is not protected by the First Amendment3, but this law goes far 
beyond that.                                                              

    While the OAG Investigative Report does make a link between misinformation on the 
internet and the radicalization of the Buffalo mass shooter (Sawyer, Decl., Ex. A, ECF No. 20-1 
at 23–26), even if the law was truly aimed at reducing the instances of hate-fueled mass shootings, 
the law is not narrowly tailored toward reaching that goal.  It is unclear what, if any, effect a 
mechanism that allows users to report hateful conduct on social media networks would have on 
reducing mass shootings, especially when the law does not even require that social media networks 
affirmatively respond to any complaints of “hateful conduct”.  In other words, it is hard to see how 
the law really changes the status quo—where some social media networks choose to identify and 
remove hateful content and others do not.                                 


2 The memorandum in support of the legislation that was presented to the New York State 
Assembly ahead of the floor debate lists the justification for the law as “concerns about 
misinformation that is spread on social media networks.”  (Sawyer Decl., Ex. C, ECF No. 20-3.)  
While the law was enacted in the wake of the Buffalo mass shooting, the original iteration of the 
bill was drafted in the wake of the events of January 6, 2021 (Compl., ECF No. 1 ¶ 30; Sawyer 
Decl., Ex. D, ECF No. 20-4 at 182–183), further suggesting that the law is really aimed at 
misinformation on the internet.  However, the First Amendment’s shielding of hate speech from 
regulation means that a state’s desire to reduce this type of speech from the public discourse 
cannot be a compelling governmental interest                              

3 The Supreme Court has held that speech that consists of “fighting words” and speech that 
incites violence or lawlessness are not protected by the First Amendment.  Chaplinsky v. New 
Hampshire, 315 U.S. 568, 572 (1942); Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U.S. 444, 447 (1969).  For 
speech to incite violence, “there must be ‘evidence or rational inference from the import of the 
language, that [the words in question] were intended to produce, and likely to produce, 
imminent’ lawless action.”  Am. Freedom Def. Initiative v. Metro. Transp. Auth., 70 F. Supp. 3d 
572, 581 (S.D.N.Y. 2015), vacated on other grounds, 109 F. Supp. 3d 626 (S.D.N.Y. 2015) 
(citations omitted).  The Hateful Conduct law’s ban on speech that incites violence is not limited 
to speech that is likely to produce imminent lawless action.              
    Accordingly, for the reasons stated above, the Court finds that Plaintiffs have demonstrated 
a substantial likelihood of success on their as applied First Amendment challenges to the Hateful 
Conduct Law.                                                              
      B.  Plaintiffs’ Facial First Amendment Challenges                  

    Plaintiffs argue that the Hateful Conduct Law “is overbroad because it applies to a 
substantial amount of protected speech, especially compared to its nonexistent or minimal lawful 
application” and is unconstitutionally vague.  (Pls.’ Mem., ECF No. 9 at 17–20.)  In response, 
Defendant argues that Plaintiffs have not demonstrated that the law would chill protected speech 
and that the operative terms of the law are clear and defined. (Def.’s Opp’n., ECF No. 21 at 18–
23.)                                                                      
    Both the Supreme Court and the Second Circuit have recognized that “[a]lthough facial 
challenges are generally disfavored, they are more readily accepted in the First Amendment 
context.”  Picard v. Magliano, 42 F.4th 89, 101 (2d Cir. 2022) (quoting Beal v. Stern, 184 F.3d 
117, 125 (2d Cir. 1999)).  Although facial invalidation of a statute is a “strong medicine” that 

should be applied “sparingly and only as a last resort”, Hobbs v. Cnty. of Westchester, 397 F.3d 
133, 155 (2d Cir. 2005) (quoting FCC v. Pacifica Foundation, 438 U.S. 726, 743 (1978)); see also 
Am. Booksellers Found. v. Dean, 342 F.3d 96, 105 (2d Cir. 2003), a court may consider a facial 
overbreadth claim where a plaintiff has established that there are no set of circumstances under 
which the challenged statute could be valid or that the challenged statute “lacks any plainly 
legitimate sweep.”  Picard, 42 F.4th at 101 (quoting United States v. Stevens, 559 U.S. 460, 472 
(2010)).                                                                  
    “It is established that the courts may, as an exception to ordinary standing requirements, 
entertain a claim that a law, even if constitutional as applied to the claimant, is so broad that it 
“may inhibit the constitutionally protected speech of third parties[.]”  Hobbs, 397 F.3d at 155.  
“The purpose of an overbreadth challenge is to prevent the chilling of constitutionally protected 
conduct, as prudent citizens will avoid behavior that may fall within the scope of a prohibition, 
even if they are not entirely sure whether it does.”  Farrell v. Burke, 449 F.3d 470, 499 (2d Cir. 

2006).  “[T]he overbreadth of a statute must not only be real, but substantial as well, judged in 
relation to the statute’s plainly legitimate sweep.”  Id. (quoting Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 
601, 615 (1973)).  “When a court finds that a statute suffers from such substantial overbreadth, all 
enforcement of the statute is generally precluded.”  Am. Booksellers Found., 342 F.3d at 104. 
    As the Court has already discussed, the law is clearly aimed at regulating speech.  Social 
media websites are publishers and curators of speech, and their users are engaged in speech by 
writing, posting, and creating content.  Although the law ostensibly is aimed at social media 
networks, it fundamentally implicates the speech of the networks’ users by mandating a policy and 
mechanism by which users can complain about other users’ protected speech.    
    Moreover, the Hateful Conduct law is a content based regulation.  The law requires that 

social media networks develop policies and procedures with respect to hate speech (or “hateful 
conduct” as it is recharacterized by Defendant).  As discussed, the First Amendment protects 
individuals’ right to engage in hate speech, and the state cannot try to inhibit that right, no matter 
how unseemly or offensive that speech may be to the general public or the state.  See Matal, 137 
S. Ct. at 1764; see also R.A.V., 505 U.S. at 391.  Thus, the Hateful Conduct Law’s targeting of 
speech that “vilifi[es]” or “humili[ates”] a group or individual based on their “race, color, religion, 
ethnicity, national origin, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or gender expression” 
N.Y. Gen. Bus. Law § 394-ccc(1)(a), clearly implicates the protected speech of social media users.   
    This could have a profound chilling effect on social media users and their protected 
freedom of expression.  Even though the law does not require social media networks to remove 
“hateful conduct” from their websites and does not impose liability on users for engaging in 
“hateful conduct”, the state’s targeting and singling out of this type of speech for special measures 

certainly could make social media users wary about the types of speech they feel free to engage in 
without facing consequences from the state.  This potential wariness is bolstered by the actual title 
of the law— “Social media networks; hateful conduct prohibited” —which strongly suggests that 
the law is really aimed at reducing, or perhaps even penalizing people who engage in, hate speech 
online.  As Plaintiffs noted during oral argument, one can easily imagine the concern that would 
arise if the government required social media networks to maintain policies and complaint 
mechanisms for anti-American or pro-American speech.  (Tr., ECF No. 27 at 29:2.)  Moreover, 
social media users often gravitate to certain websites based on the kind of community and content 
that is fostered on that particular website.  Some social media websites—including Plaintiffs’—
intentionally foster a “pro-free speech” community and ethos that may become less appealing to 

users who intentionally seek out spaces where they feel like they can express themselves freely. 
    The potential chilling effect to social media users is exacerbated by the indefiniteness of 
some of the Hateful Conduct Law’s key terms.  It is not clear what the terms like “vilify” and 
“humiliate” mean for the purposes of the law.  While it is true that there are readily accessible 
dictionary definitions of those words, the law does not define what type of “conduct” or “speech” 
could be encapsulated by them.  For example, could a post using the hashtag “BlackLivesMatter” 
or “BlueLivesMatter” be considered “hateful conduct” under the law?  Likewise, could social 
media posts expressing anti-American views be considered conduct that humiliates or vilifies a 
group based on national origin?  It is not clear from the face of the text, and thus the law does not 
put social media users on notice of what kinds of speech or content is now the target of government 
regulation.                                                               
     Accordingly, because the Hateful Conduct Law appears to “reach[…] a substantial amount 
of constitutionally protected conduct”, Farrell, 449 F.3d at 496 (quoting Kolender v. Lawson, 461 

U.S. 352, 358 n.8 (1983)), the Court finds that Plaintiffs have demonstrated a likelihood of success 
on their facial challenges under the First Amendment.4                    
      C.  Preemption Under Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act 
    Lastly, Plaintiffs allege that the Hateful Conduct Law is preempted by Section 230 of the 
Communications Decency Act because it imposes liability on websites by treating them as 
publishers.  (Pl.’s Mem., ECF No. 9 at 20–⁠21.)                           
    The Communications Decency Act provides that “[n]o provider or user of an interactive 
computer service shall be treated as the publisher or speaker of any information provided by 
another information content provider.”  47 U.S.C. § 230(c)(1); see also Ricci v. Teamsters Union 
Loc. 456, 781 F.3d 25, 27 (2d Cir. 2015).  The Act has an express preemption provision which 

states that “[n]o cause of action may be brought and no liability may be imposed under any State 
or local law that is inconsistent with this section.”  47 U.S.C. § 230(e)(3). 



4 The Court also finds that severing parts of the law would not serve to save the entire statute.  
As stated in footnote four, while speech that incites violence is not protected by the First 
Amendment, whether speech does in fact incite violence is a fact-based inquiry.  See Am. 
Freedom Def. Initiative, 70 F. Supp. 3d at 581 (For speech to incite violence, “there must be 
‘evidence or rational inference from the import of the language, that [the words in question] were 
intended to produce, and likely to produce, imminent’ lawless action.”).  The Supreme Court has 
rarely applied this standard, “and never explicitly found speech to be on the proscribable side of 
the standard.”  Id.  Thus, it is not clear that limiting the Hateful Conduct Law only to speech that 
incites violence would necessarily pass constitutional muster.  In addition, at oral argument, 
Plaintiffs argued that the law was not severable.  (Tr., ECF No. 27 at 62:8–63:7.) 
    A plain reading of the Hateful Conduct Law shows that Plaintiffs’ argument is without 
merit.  The law imposes liability on social media networks for failing to provide a mechanism for 
users to complain of “hateful conduct” and for failure to disclose their policy on how they will 
respond to complaints.  N.Y. Gen. Bus. Law § 394-ccc(5).  The law does not impose liability on 

social media networks for failing to respond to an incident of “hateful conduct”, nor does it impose 
liability on the network for its users own “hateful conduct”.  The law does not even require that 
social media networks remove instances of “hateful conduct” from their websites.  Therefore, the 
Hateful Conduct Law does not impose liability on Plaintiffs as publishers in contravention of the 
Communications Decency Act.                                               
 III.   Balance of the Equities                                          
    Finally, given that Plaintiffs have demonstrated a substantial likelihood of success on the 
merits of their First Amendment claims, the Court must consider whether “the balance of the 
equities tips in [Plaintiffs’] favor, and [whether] an injunction is in the public interest.”  ACLU v. 
Clapper, 804 F.3d 617, 622 (2d Cir. 2015).                                

    Given  that  “enjoining  enforcement  of  a  statute  that  potentially  violates  citizens’ 
constitutional rights is in the public interest”, and that Defendant can show no harm as a result of 
being prevented from enforcing an unconstitutional statute, the Court finds that the balance of the 
equities tips in favor of granting the preliminary injunction.  See CompassCare, 465 F. Supp. 3d 
at 159.                                                                   
                          CONCLUSION                                     
    Accordingly, for the aforementioned reasons, the Court finds that Plaintiffs are entitled to 
a preliminary injunction prohibiting the enforcement of N.Y. Gen. Bus. Law § 394-ccc.  The 
Clerk of Court is respectfully requested to terminate the pending motion at ECF No. 8.   
Dated:  February 14, 2023 
      New York, New York                       ANDREW L. CARTER, JR. 
                                               United States District  Judge 

                                     21