UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                                              
NORTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                                             
______________________________________________                            

TYRONE WALKER,                                                            

                 Plaintiff,                                            
                                     9:17-CV-1008                      
v.                                      (GTS/CFH)                         

JOSEPH BELLNIER, Dep. Comm’r.; DONALD UHLER,                              
Super., Upstate Corr. Fac.; PAUL P. WOODRUFF,  Dep.                       
Super. of Sec., Upstate Corr. Fac.; JOANNE FITCHETTE,                     
Dep. Super. of Programs, Upstate Corr. Fac.; MELISSA A.                   
COOK, Offender Rehab. Coordinator, Upstate Corr. Fac.;                    
and JAMES A. O’GORMAN,                                                    

                 Defendants.                                           
______________________________________________                            

APPEARANCES:                               OF COUNSEL:                    

TYRONE WALKER, 94-A-5258                                                  
 Plaintiff, Pro Se                                                     
Upstate Correctional Facility                                             
P.O. Box 2001                                                             
Malone, New York 12953                                                    

HON. LETITIA A. JAMES                      LYNN MARIE KNAPP, ESQ.         
Attorney General for the State of New York           Assistant Attorney General   
Counsel for Defendants                                                 
The Capitol                                                               
Albany, New York  12224                                                   

GLENN T. SUDDABY, Chief United States District Judge                      
                    DECISION and ORDER                                 

  Currently before the Court, in this pro se prisoner civil rights action filed by Tyrone 
Walker (“Plaintiff”) against the six above-captioned employees of the New York State 
Department of Corrections and Community Supervision (“Defendants” or “DOCCS”) pursuant 
to 42 U.S.C. § 1983, are (1)  United States Magistrate Judge Christian F. Hummel’s 
Report-Recommendation recommending that Plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment be 
denied, Defendants’ cross-motion for summary judgment be granted, and Plaintiff’s Second 
Amended Complaint (Dkt. No. 31) be dismissed in its entirety, and (2) Plaintiff’s Objections to 
the Report-Recommendation.  (Dkt. Nos. 102, 103.)  For the reasons set forth below, the 

Report-Recommendation is accepted and adopted in its entirety.            
I.   RELEVANT BACKGROUND                                                  
  A.   Magistrate Judge Hummel’s Report-Recommendation                 
  Generally in his Report-Recommendation, Magistrate Judge Hummel rendered the 
following three findings of fact and conclusions of law: (1) to the extent that Plaintiff asserts a 
Fourteenth Amendment due process claim based on the alleged untimeliness of his periodic 
administrative-segregation reviews, that claim should be dismissed because of the lack of 
admissible record evidence from which a rational fact finder could conclude that those reviews 
were indeed untimely; (2) to the extent that Plaintiff asserts a Fourteenth Amendment due 
process claim based on the alleged meaninglessness of his periodic administrative-segregation 

reviews, that claim should be dismissed because of the lack of admissible record evidence from 
which a rational fact finder could conclude that those reviews were indeed untimely; and (3) 
because adequate grounds exists upon which to base a dismissal of the claims in Plaintiff’s 
Second Amended Complaint, the Court need not reach the merits of Defendants’ alternative 
argument that, based on the admissible record evidence, they are protected from liability as a 
matter of law by the doctrine of qualified immunity.  (Dkt. No. 102, at Part III.B.) 
  B.   Plaintiff’s Objections to the Report-Recommendation             
  Liberally construed, Plaintiff’s Objections assert the following two arguments: (1) 

                             2                                         
Plaintiff’s Fourteenth Amendment due process claim based on the untimeliness of his periodic 
administrative-segregation reviews should not be dismissed because (a) admissible evidence 
supporting the claim does exist (most notably, the fact that the reviews were never provided by 
Defendants in support of their previous motion to dismiss combined with the fact that gaps of 

two to six months exist between when the reviews were allegedly conducted and alleged 
completed, from which a rational fact finder could reasonably infer that they were fraudulently 
completed), and (b) Magistrate Judge Hummel is incorrect that Defendants’ violation of DOCCS 
Directive No. 4933 (specifically, the Directive’s requirement that the reviews be provided to the 
inmate in a timely fashion) cannot, and does not, constitute a violation of the Fourteenth 
Amendment; and (2) Plaintiff’s Fourteenth Amendment due process claim based on the 
meaninglessness of his periodic administrative-segregation reviews should not be dismissed 
because Magistrate Judge Hummel ignores Plaintiff’s record evidence that the reviews were “a 
sham, rote, perfunctory and a fraud” (most notably, the lack of the issuance of misbehavior 
reports to charge Plaintiff with some of the misconduct asserted in the reviews, and the 

above-referenced evidence that the reviews were fraudulently created and backdated).  (Dkt. No. 
103, at Points I-III.)                                                    
II.  STANDARD OF REVIEW                                                   
  When a specific objection is made to a portion of a magistrate judge's report- 
recommendation, the Court subjects that portion of the report-recommendation to a de novo 
review.  Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b)(2); 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(C).  To be “specific,” the objection 
must, with particularity, “identify [1] the portions of the proposed findings, recommendations, or 
report to which it has an objection and [2] the basis for the objection.”  N.D.N.Y. L.R. 72.1(c).1  

1    See also Mario v. P&C Food Markets, Inc., 313 F.3d 758, 766 (2d Cir. 2002) (“Although 
                             3                                         
When performing such a de novo review, “[t]he judge may . . . receive further evidence. . . .” 28 
U.S.C. § 636(b)(1).  However, a district court will ordinarily refuse to consider evidentiary 
material that could have been, but was not, presented to the magistrate judge in the first 
instance.2  Similarly, a district court will ordinarily refuse to consider argument that could have 

been, but was not, presented to the magistrate judge in the first instance.  See Zhao v. State Univ. 
of N.Y., 04-CV-0210, 2011 WL 3610717, at *1 (E.D.N.Y. Aug. 15, 2011) (“[I]t is established 
law that a district judge will not consider new arguments raised in objections to a magistrate 
judge's report and recommendation that could have been raised before the magistrate but were 
not.”) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted); Hubbard v. Kelley, 752 F. Supp.2d 311, 
312-13 (W.D.N.Y. 2009) (“In this circuit, it is established law that a district judge will not 
consider new arguments raised in objections to a magistrate judge's report and recommendation 

Mario filed objections to the magistrate's report and recommendation, the statement with respect 
to his Title VII claim was not specific enough to preserve this claim for review. The only 
reference made to the Title VII claim was one sentence on the last page of his objections, where 
he stated that it was error to deny his motion on the Title VII claim ‘[f]or the reasons set forth in 
Plaintiff's Memorandum of Law in Support of Motion for Partial Summary Judgment.’ This bare 
statement, devoid of any reference to specific findings or recommendations to which he objected 
and why, and unsupported by legal authority, was not sufficient to preserve the Title VII 
claim.”).                                                                 
2    See Paddington Partners v. Bouchard, 34 F.3d 1132, 1137-38 (2d Cir. 1994) (“In 
objecting to a magistrate's report before the district court, a party has no right to present further 
testimony when it offers no justification for not offering the testimony at the hearing before the 
magistrate.”) [internal quotation marks and citations omitted]; Pan Am. World Airways, Inc. v. 
Int'l Bhd. of Teamsters, 894 F.2d 36, 40, n.3 (2d Cir. 1990) (finding that district court did not 
abuse its discretion in denying plaintiff's request to present additional testimony where plaintiff 
“offered no justification for not offering the testimony at the hearing before the magistrate”); cf. 
U. S. v. Raddatz, 447 U.S. 667, 676, n.3 (1980) (“We conclude that to construe § 636(b)(1) to 
require the district court to conduct a second hearing whenever either party objected to the 
magistrate's credibility findings would largely frustrate the plain objective of Congress to 
alleviate the increasing congestion of litigation in the district courts.”); Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b), 
Advisory Committee Notes: 1983 Addition (“The term ‘de novo’ does not indicate that a 
secondary evidentiary hearing is required.”).                             
                             4                                         
that could have been raised before the magistrate but were not.”) (internal quotation marks 
omitted).                                                                 
  When only a general objection is made to a portion of a magistrate judge's 
report-recommendation, the Court subjects that portion of the report-recommendation to only a 

clear error review.  Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b)(2),(3); Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b), Advisory Committee 
Notes: 1983 Addition; see also Brown v. Peters, 95-CV-1641, 1997 WL 599355, at *2-3 
(N.D.N.Y. Sept. 22, 1997) (Pooler, J.) [collecting cases], aff'd without opinion, 175 F.3d 1007 
(2d Cir. 1999).  Similarly, when an objection merely reiterates the same arguments made by the 
objecting party in its original papers submitted to the magistrate judge, the Court subjects that 
portion of the report-recommendation challenged by those arguments to only a clear error 
review.3  Finally, when no objection is made to a portion of a report-recommendation, the Court 
subjects that portion of the report-recommendation to only a clear error review.  Fed. R. Civ. P. 
72(b), Advisory Committee Notes: 1983 Addition.  When performing such a “clear error” 
review, “the court need only satisfy itself that there is no clear error on the face of the record in 
order to accept the recommendation.”  Id.4                                


3    See Mario, 313 F.3d at 766 (“Merely referring the court to previously filed papers or 
arguments does not constitute an adequate objection under either Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b) or Local 
Civil Rule 72.3(a)(3).”); Camardo v. Gen. Motors Hourly-Rate Emp. Pension Plan, 806 F. Supp. 
380, 382 (W.D.N.Y. 1992) (explaining that court need not consider objections that merely 
constitute a "rehashing" of the same arguments and positions taken in original papers submitted 
to the magistrate judge); accord, Praileau v. Cnty. of Schenectady, 09-CV-0924, 2010 WL 
3761902, at *1, n.1 (N.D.N.Y. Sept. 20, 2010) (McAvoy, J.); Hickman ex rel. M.A.H. v. Astrue, 
07-CV-1077, 2010 WL 2985968, at *3 & n.3 (N.D.N.Y. July 27, 2010) (Mordue, C.J.); Almonte 
v. N.Y.S. Div. of Parole, 04-CV-0484, 2006 WL 149049, at *4 (N.D.N.Y. Jan. 18, 2006) (Sharpe, 
J.).                                                                      
4    See also Batista v. Walker, 94-CV-2826, 1995 WL 453299, at *1 (S.D.N.Y. July 31, 
1995) (Sotomayor, J.) (“I am permitted to adopt those sections of [a magistrate judge's] report to 
which no specific objection is made, so long as those sections are not facially erroneous.”) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted).                         
                             5                                         
  After conducting the appropriate review, the Court may “accept, reject, or modify, in 
whole or in part, the findings or recommendations made by the magistrate judge.”  28 U.S.C. § 
636(b)(1)(C)).                                                            
III.  ANALYSIS                                                            

         After carefully reviewing the relevant papers herein, including Magistrate Judge 
Hummel’s thorough Report-Recommendation, the Court can find no error in those portions of 
the Report-Recommendation to which Plaintiff has specifically objected, and no clear error in the 
remaining portions of the Report-Recommendation.  Magistrate Judge Hummel employed the 
proper standards, accurately recited the facts, and reasonably applied the law to those facts.  As 
a result, the Report-Recommendation is accepted and adopted in its entirety for the reasons set 
forth therein. To those reasons, the Court adds only four points.         
  First, for the sake of brevity, the Court will assume that the arguments asserted in 
Plaintiff’s Objections are not simply repetitions (albeit elaborations) of arguments that he made 
to Magistrate Judge Hummel, despite the indication to the contrary.  (Compare Dkt. No. 100, at 

3-5 [Plf.’s Opp’n to Defs.’ Cross-Motion] with Dkt. No. 15, at 3-14 [Plf.’s Objections].)   
  Second, the Court rejects the first argument in Plaintiff’s Objections (i.e., regarding 
Magistrate Judge Hummel’s findings and conclusions regarding Plaintiff’s Fourteenth 
Amendment due process claim based on untimeliness) as unpersuasive. The Court notes that 
Defendants had no duty to provide the reviews in support of their previous motion to dismiss, 
and indeed would have been unable to do so unless they established that the reviews were 
incorporated by reference in (or integral to) Plaintiff’s Second Amended Complaint.  Moreover, 
Plaintiff’s tenacious reliance on the delays in the completion of the reviews, and on a purported 

                             6                                         
violation of a DOCCS directive, are to no avail.  The former is a mere speculation of fraud, and 
the latter is not a constitutional violation, as explained by Magistrate Judge Hummel.  (Dkt. No. 
102, at 25.)                                                              
  Third, the Court rejects the second argument in Plaintiff’s Objections (i.e., regarding 

Magistrate Judge Hummel’s findings and conclusions regarding Plaintiff’s Fourteenth 
Amendment due process claim based on meaninglessness) as also unpersuasive.  The purported 
lack of issuance of some misbehavior reports, even if true, does not constitute a ground on which  
the Court may substitute its own judgment for that of Defendants.  Moreover, the Court has 
already dispensed with Plaintiff’s argument that the reviews were fraudulently backdated. 
  Fourth, and finally, in the alternative, the Court finds that qualified immunity constitutes 
an alternative ground on which to base the dismissal of Plaintiff’s claims for the reasons stated in 
Defendants’ memorandum of law.  (Dkt. No. 96, at 10-11 [attaching pages “9” and “10” of 
Defs.’ Memo. of Law].)                                                    
  ACCORDINGLY, it is                                                   

  ORDERED that Magistrate Hummel’s Report-Recommendation (Dkt. No. 102) is 
ACCEPTED and ADOPTED in its entirety; and it is further                   
  ORDERED that Plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment (Dkt. No. 79) is DENIED; 
and it is further                                                         
  ORDERED that Defendants’ cross-motion for summary judgment (Dkt. No. 86) is 
GRANTED; and it is further                                                
  ORDERED that Plaintiff’s Second Amended Complaint (Dkt. No. 31) is DISMISSED 
in its entirety.                                                          

                             7                                         
   The Court certifies that an appeal from this Decision and Order would not be taken in 
good faith. 
Dated: March 8, 2021 
   Syracuse, New York 

                                     Glenn T. Suddaby                  
                                     Chief U.S.  District Judge