UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                           

               DISTRICT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE                             


Elizabeth F. Warner,                                                      
Plaintiff                                                            

v.                                 Case No. 20-cv-514-SM             
                                   Opinion No. 2024 DNH 027          

Louise DeJoy1, Postmaster                                                 
General, on behalf of the                                                 
United States Postal Service,                                             
Defendant                                                            



                       O R D E R                                     

Elizabeth Warner has worked for the United States Postal             
Service since 1998.  In January of 2018, she applied for a                
promotion to the position of Postmaster of the Durham, New                
Hampshire, post office.  She did not receive that promotion and           
the job was offered to a younger man who, according to Warner,            
had significantly less experience.  Later that year, Warner               
applied to become the Postmaster of Somersworth, New Hampshire.           
She did not receive that promotion either and, once again, she            
says the position was offered to a younger man with less                  

1    Plaintiff originally named as defendant Megan J. Brennan,            
the former Postmaster General.  But, on June 15, 2020, Louise             
DeJoy was appointed Postmaster General of the United States.              
experience.  Warner attributes her inability to secure those              
promotions to both gender and age discrimination.                         


The United States Postal Service (“USPS”) denies that                
Warner’s age or gender played any role in the selection of the            
new Postmasters for Durham and Somersworth.  Indeed, says the             
USPS, the undisputed material facts of record establish that it           
had legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for choosing                    
applicants other than Warner for those positions.  Moreover, the          
USPS asserts that there is insufficient evidence of unlawful              
discrimination to permit a rational trier of fact to conclude             
that Warner has any viable causes of action.  Accordingly, it             
moves for summary judgment on all remaining claims in Warner’s            
complaint.  Warner objects.                                               


For the reasons discussed, the government’s motion for               
summary judgment as to both of Warner’s remaining discrimination          
claims is granted.                                                        

                  Standard of Review                                 
When ruling on a motion for summary judgment, the court is           
“obliged to review the record in the light most favorable to the          
nonmoving party, and to draw all reasonable inferences in the             
nonmoving party’s favor.”  Block Island Fishing, Inc. v. Rogers,          
844 F.3d 358, 360 (1st Cir. 2016) (citation omitted).  Summary            
judgment is appropriate when the record reveals “no genuine               
dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to             

judgment as a matter of law.”  Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a).  In this            
context, a factual dispute “is ‘genuine’ if the evidence of               
record permits a rational factfinder to resolve it in favor of            
either party, and ‘material’ if its existence or nonexistence             
has the potential to change the outcome of the suit.”  Rando v.           
Leonard, 826 F.3d 553, 556 (1st Cir. 2016) (citation omitted).            
Where a genuine dispute of material fact exists, such a dispute           
must be resolved by a trier of fact, not by the court on summary          
judgment.  See, e.g., Kelley v. LaForce, 288 F.3d 1, 9 (1st Cir.          
2002).                                                                    

When objecting to a motion for summary judgment, “[a]s to            

issues on which the party opposing summary judgment would bear            
the burden of proof at trial, that party may not simply rely on           
the absence of evidence but, rather, must point to definite and           
competent evidence showing the existence of a genuine issue of            
material fact.”  Perez v. Lorraine Enters., 769 F.3d 23, 29–30            
(1st Cir. 2014).  In other words, “a laundry list of                      
possibilities and hypotheticals” and “[s]peculation about mere            
possibilities, without more, is not enough to stave off summary           
judgment.”  Tobin v. Fed. Express Corp., 775 F.3d 448, 451–52             
(1st Cir. 2014).  See generally Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc.,          
477 U.S. 242, 249 (1986).                                                 


                      Background                                     
Warner began working for the USPS in 1998.  Before the               
events at issue, she had held a variety of jobs within the USPS,          
ranging from level 16 to as high as level 20 (an interim                  
position she held while another employee was on leave).                   
Generally speaking, the higher the level of a position, the               
greater the responsibilities, benefits, and salary.  In June of           
2022, after the events underlying this suit, Warner was promoted          
to Postmaster of Hampton, New Hampshire - a level 21 position -           
where she currently works (or worked, as of the date of her May,          
2023, deposition).                                                        


Two years before her promotion to Postmaster of Hampton,             
Warner applied for a level 20 position as Postmaster of Durham,           
New Hampshire.  That position offered both an increase in salary          
and benefits over her then-current job.  Kathleen Hayes, the              
Post Office Operations Manager (“POOM”) for the Northern New              
England District and Warner’s direct supervisor, interviewed              
Warner for the position.  Warner was not offered the job, which           
was, instead, offered to Mr. Minigan, a younger male applicant.           
At the time, Minigan was 36 years old.  Warner was 58.  Warner            
says Ms. Hayes informed her that she decided to hire Minigan for          
the position because he had more experience of the sort needed            
for that particular job.  Warner offers no direct evidence that           

she was the victim of unlawful discrimination, but claims that            
the USPS’s explanation is a pretext for both age and gender-              
based discrimination.                                                     

A few months later, in the summer of 2018, Warner applied            
for another vacant level-20 postmaster position - this time in            
Somersworth, New Hampshire.  Warner alleges that during the               
course of her interview for that job, Hayes made two statements           
that reveal an underlying bias against women and older employees          
(notwithstanding that Hayes is both).  Those statements are the           
foundation upon which Warner’s discrimination claims are built,           
so they are worth stating specifically:                                   


First, Warner alleges that Hayes said, “I don’t think                
we have ever had a woman Postmaster in Somersworth.  I               
wonder how that would work” - or something to that                   
effect.  Warner points to that statement as evidence                 
of Ms. Hayes’s gender bias.                                          

Next, Warner alleges that during the same interview,                 
Hayes asked her whether she believed she “had the                    
energy” to be the Postmaster of Somersworth (which was               
known to be a difficult post office to manage) - a                   
question Warner says evidences Hayes’s age bias.                     

Warner was not hired as the Postmaster of Somersworth and            
later learned that the position had been offered to Mr. Adams, a          
53 year-old man.  Adams had been the Postmaster in South                  
Berwick, Maine, and expressed a desire to relocate to New                 
Hampshire (his granddaughter had been diagnosed with a medical            

condition and he wished to be closer to his family).  In                  
essence, Adams was seeking (and secured) a lateral transfer from          
Maine to New Hampshire.  Warner again points to age and gender-           
based discrimination as the reason she was not offered the                
position.  She advances claims under the Age Discrimination in            
Employment Act (“ADEA”), 29 U.S.C. § 621, et seq. (count one)             
and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. §                
2000e-2(a)(1) (count two).                                                

                      Discussion                                     
I.   Timeliness.                                                          
As a preliminary matter, the USPS asserts that Warner’s              

claims arising out of the denied promotion to Postmaster of               
Durham are untimely.  Because she is a federal employee, Warner           
is subject to a somewhat atypical administrative exhaustion               
requirement.  As the Supreme Court has noted, “Before a federal           
civil servant can sue his employer for violating Title VII, he            
must, among other things, ‘initiate contact’ with an Equal                
Employment Opportunity counselor at his agency ‘within 45 days            
of the date of the matter alleged to be discriminatory.’”  Green          
v. Brennan, 578 U.S. 547, 549–50 (2016) (quoting 29 CFR §                 
1614.105(a)(1)).                                                          


All agree that Warner did not contact an EEOC counselor              
until September 11, 2018 - significantly more than 45 days after          
receiving notice that she had not secured the promotion to                
Postmaster of Durham.  So, says the USPS, any claims arising out          
of that allegedly discriminatory “failure-to-promote” are time-           
barred.  But, as Warner points out, a failure to exhaust                  
administrative remedies is not jurisdictional.  Rather, the               
deadlines established to pursue administrative remedies are more          
akin to brief statutes of limitation and are, therefore, subject          
to equitable tolling.  See Nat’l R.R. Passenger Corp. v. Morgan,          
536 U.S. 101, 113–14 (2002).  Critically, however,                        

In the context of litigation initiated by federal                    
employees, we have noted that administrative                         
exhaustion is a condition to the waiver of sovereign                 
immunity and, therefore, must be strictly construed.                 
It is only in exceptional circumstances that equitable               
tolling will extend a filing deadline.  To this end,                 
the heavy burden of proving entitlement to equitable                 
relief lies with the complainant.                                    


Bartlett v. Dep’t of the Treasury (I.R.S.), 749 F.3d 1, 9–10              
(1st Cir. 2014) (citations and internal punctuation omitted).             
In support of her claimed entitlement to equitable tolling,          
Warner argues that she did not have “unequivocal” notice that             
she had been the victim of unlawful discrimination until August           

17, 2018 (when, during the interview for the Somersworth                  
position, Ms. Hayes made the statements Warner says evidence her          
age and gender bias).  That is to say, with respect to the                
Durham position, Warner obviously knew that she had been subject          
to an adverse employment action: she did not receive the                  
promotion, which was offered to a younger man.  But, as she sees          
things, she had no reason to believe that she was the victim of           
unlawful discrimination until much later, when she subsequently           
interviewed for the vacant Somersworth Postmaster position.  It           
was during that later interview on August 17, 2018, that she              
claims to have discovered that Hayes harbored an animus against           
women and older employees.  And, just 25 days later, she                  

complained to the EEOC office.                                            

In short, Warner says that before that day in August of              
2018, she knew only that she had not received the promotion to            
Dover Postmaster; she had no reason to think that decision was            
based upon unlawful discrimination.  Thus, she believes the 45-           
day reporting requirement should be tolled until she made that            
discovery.  See Plaintiff’s Opposition Memorandum (document no.           
48) at 15-16 (citing Thomas v. Eastman Kodak Co., 183 F.3d 38,            
50 (1st Cir. 1999) (holding the administrative limitations                
period was tolled because the employee “did not initially have            
any crystallized implications or apparent tangible effects” of            

discrimination)).                                                         

The law on this point - at least in this circuit - is                
complex and somewhat convoluted.  At this juncture, the                   
government’s position is insufficiently briefed/developed to              
determine whether Warner’s claims arising out of her failure to           
secure the Durham position are time-barred.  Accordingly, on              
that discrete issue, the USPS’s motion for summary judgment must          
be denied and the court will proceed as though Warner’s claims            
arising out of the denial of her application for the Durham               
postmaster position are timely.                                           


II.  Proper Allocation of the Burden of Proof.                            
In the typical employment discrimination case (in which the          
plaintiff is relying on circumstantial evidence of unlawful               
discrimination), courts employ the familiar burden-shifting               
framework established in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411            
U.S. 792 (1973).  Under that analysis, a plaintiff must first             
establish a prima facie case of discrimination by showing that            
(1) she is a member of a protected class; (2) she was qualified           
for the position she sought; and (3) the employer took a                  
materially adverse employment action against her (here, the               
failure to promote).  If the plaintiff makes that modest                  
threshold showing, the burden shifts to the employer to                   

articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the                
adverse employment action.  As courts have routinely noted, the           
employer’s burden is simply one of production, not persuasion,            
and the plaintiff always retains the ultimate burden of proving           
that she was the victim of unlawful discrimination.  See, e.g.,           
Mesnick v. Gen. Elec. Co., 950 F.2d 816, 823 (1st Cir. 1991).             
At the third and final stage of the analysis, the plaintiff must          
point to evidence showing that the employer’s justification for           
the adverse employment action is a pretext and the actual reason          
was discriminatory.  See, e.g., Theidon v. Harvard Univ., 948             
F.3d 477, 496 (1st Cir. 2020).                                            


But, says Warner, this is not the typical case and she               
claims to have “direct” evidence that demonstrates she was the            
victim of both age and gender discrimination (that is, the two            
comments made by Hayes during Warner’s interview for the                  
Somersworth position).  See Plaintiff’s Opposition Memorandum at          
14.  Warner says those statements establish that her age and              
gender were “motivating factors” in the USPS’s decision not to            
grant her either of the two promotions she sought.  Moreover,             
says Warner, those statements are sufficient to alter the                 
parties’ respective burdens of proof.  See Id.  That evidence,            
she says, imposes upon the USPS the obligation to demonstrate             
that it would have made the same decision (i.e., not to promote           

Warner) even if it had not taken the protected characteristics            
of age and/or gender into account.  In short, plaintiffs says             
her “direct evidence” that the USPS acted unlawfully by taking            
into account her age and her gender makes this a “mixed-motive”           
case, rather than a “pretext” case.  See generally 42 U.S.C. §            
2000e-2(m).  The court disagrees.                                         

First, the Supreme Court has made clear that the ADEA does           
not “authorize a mixed-motives age discrimination claim.”  Gross          
v. FBL Fin. Servs., Inc., 557 U.S. 167, 175 (2009).  See also             
Id. at 180 (“We hold that a plaintiff bringing a disparate-               
treatment claim pursuant to the ADEA must prove, by a                     

preponderance of the evidence, that age was the ‘but-for’ cause           
of the challenged adverse employment action.  The burden of               
persuasion does not shift to the employer to show that it would           
have taken the action regardless of age, even when a plaintiff            
has produced some evidence that age was one motivating factor in          
that decision.”).  So, the court need only focus on Warner’s              
claimed entitlement to a mixed-motive analysis of her Title VII           
sex discrimination claim.                                                 
According to Warner, Hayes’s observation that the                    
Somersworth Post Office had never had a female postmaster                 
establishes - by “direct evidence,” no less - that Warner’s age           

was a “motivating factor” in the USPS’s decision to deny her the          
two promotions at issue.  42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(m).  It does not.           
Warner does not have direct evidence that her age was a                   
motivating factor in the USPS’s employment decision.  Indeed,             
she does not even have what might be described as strong or               
compelling indirect or circumstantial evidence of such                    
discrimination.  Hayes’s comment is, at most, weak and                    
inferential support for Warner’s claim.                                   

Parenthetically, the court notes that although some courts           
and practitioners continue to use the phrase “direct evidence”            
when discussing “mixed-motive” discrimination cases, it is no             

longer a preferred way to describe the nature or quantum of               
evidence a plaintiff must produce in order to benefit from the            
mixed-motive analysis.  The notion that a plaintiff must                  
presented “direct evidence” of unlawful discrimination to obtain          
a mixed-motive analysis arises from Justice O’Connor’s                    
concurring opinion in Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 U.S. 228,          
276 (1989) (“In my view, in order to justify shifting the burden          
on the issue of causation to the defendant, a disparate                   
treatment plaintiff must show by direct evidence that an                  
illegitimate criterion was a substantial factor in the                    
decision.”).  But, that view was later rejected by the Supreme            
Court in Desert Palace, Inc. v. Costa, 539 U.S. 90 (2003)                 

(holding that “direct evidence of discrimination is not required          
in mixed-motive cases” and concluding that “a plaintiff need              
only present sufficient evidence for a reasonable jury to                 
conclude, by a preponderance of the evidence, that race, color,           
religion, sex, or national origin was a motivating factor for             
any employment practice.”) (internal punctuation omitted).                

So, in the wake of Desert Palace, evidence sufficient to             
warrant a mixed-motive analysis can be either direct or                   
circumstantial.  Such evidence must, however, be particularly             
compelling - that is to say, it must be sufficient to                     
“demonstrate” that a proscribed characteristic (e.g., gender)             

“was a motivating factor” in the adverse employment action.  42           
U.S.C. § 2000e-2(m).  In the 20 years since the Supreme Court’s           
opinion in Desert Palace, the Court of Appeals for the First              
Circuit has repeatedly described such evidence as “smoking gun            
proof” or “spot on evidence” that an employer relied upon                 
unlawful characteristics.  See, e.g., Theidon v. Harvard Univ.,           
948 F.3d 477, 495 (1st Cir. 2020); Rivera-Rivera v. Medina &              
Medina, Inc., 898 F.3d 77, 88 (1st Cir. 2018); PowerComm, LLC v.          
Holyoke Gas & Elec. Dep’t, 657 F.3d 31, 35 (1st Cir. 2011);               
Ingram v. Brink’s, Inc., 414 F.3d 222, 230 (1st Cir. 2005).               


Hayes’s comment about the (apparently correct) historical            
lack of a female postmaster in Somersworth is not evidence of             
that sort; it does not “demonstrate” (or even raise a plausible           
inference) that gender was a “motivating factor” for the USPS’s           
decision to promote candidates other than Warner, see 42 U.S.C.           
§ 2000e-2(m), nor does it show that the USPS placed “substantial          
reliance” on gender in making those hiring decisions.  See                
generally, Greene v. Walgreen E. Co., No. 16-2487, 2018 WL                
8263947, at *2 (1st Cir. Nov. 15, 2018) (declining to                     
characterize a memo encouraging plaintiff to step down or resign          
rather than apply for a different position as “direct evidence”           
of discrimination); PowerComm, 657 F.3d at 35 (“PowerComm also            

alleges as legal error that its first two claims should be                
judged under mixed-motive analysis, because there is ‘direct              
evidence’ of racial discrimination.  However, ‘direct evidence’           
refers to ‘a smoking gun’ showing that the decision-maker relied          
upon a protected characteristic in taking an employment action.           
PowerComm has adduced no such evidence here.”) (citations                 
omitted; emphasis in original); see also Smith v. F.W. Morse &            
Co., 76 F.3d 413, 421 (1st Cir. 1996) (decided before Desert              
Palace, but describing such “smoking gun” evidence as                     
establishing that an employer relied upon a protected                     
characteristic as a motivating factor in the employment                   
decision, such as “an admission by the employer that it                   

explicitly took actual or anticipated pregnancy into account in           
reaching an employment decision”).                                        

Given the absence of evidence sufficient to demonstrate, by          
a preponderance, that Warner’s gender was a motivating factor in          
the decision not to award her either of the two promotions she            
sought, the appropriate framework within which to analyze her             
Title VII claim is that established by McDonnell Douglas.                 
Nevertheless, whether the court analyzes that claim under the             
traditional McDonnell Douglas framework or as a “mixed-motive”            
case is not outcome determinative.  As the court of appeals for           
this circuit has noted, “under both approaches, plaintiffs must           

present enough evidence to permit a finding that there was                
differential treatment in an employment action and that the               
adverse employment decision was caused at least in part by a              
forbidden type of bias.”  Chadwick v. WellPoint, Inc., 561 F.3d           
38, 45 (1st Cir. 2009) (citations and internal punctuation                
omitted).  As discussed below, such evidence is lacking in this           
case.                                                                     
III. Evidence of Discrimination.                                          
Under the ADEA, an employer may not “fail or refuse to hire          
or [] discharge any individual or otherwise discriminate against          

any individual with respect to his compensation, terms,                   
conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such                  
individual’s age.”  29 U.S.C.A. § 623.  Similarly, Title VII of           
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 makes it unlawful for an employer            
“to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual, or             
otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to          
his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of                     
employment, because of such individual’s race, color, religion,           
sex, or national origin.”  42 U.S.C.A. § 2000e-2.                         

At the first step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, it is           
plain that Warner has made out prima facie claims of both age             

and gender-based discrimination.  When she applied for the two            
vacant Postmaster positions she was a member of a protected               
class under both Title VII and the ADEA - that is to say, she is          
a woman and she was at least forty years old at the time.  She            
also had all the necessary minimum qualifications for those               
positions.  And, finally, she suffered adverse employment                 
actions when she was denied both promotions.  Thus, the burden            
shifts to the USPS to articulate legitimate, non-discriminatory           
reasons for the decisions not to promote Warner.                          
The USPS says Warner’s age and gender played no role in its          
hiring decisions for the Durham and Somersworth positions.                
Warner was not offered either promotion because the candidates            

who were hired had more experience of the type needed (that is,           
overseeing city delivery routes), were better organized,                  
presented themselves more impressively in their interviews, and           
had demonstrated superior leadership skills.  Those are plainly           
legitimate and non-discriminatory reasons for the two hiring              
decisions at issue, so the burden reverts to Warner to                    
demonstrate that they are pretextual and the real reason she was          
not promoted was defendant’s unlawful discrimination based upon           
her age and/or gender.                                                    

Warner offers no evidence that she was denied the Durham             
promotion based on her age or gender.  Indeed, she concedes as            

much in arguing that her otherwise time-barred claims relating            
to that position are subject to equitable tolling.  See                   
Plaintiff’s Opposition Memorandum (document no. 48) at 15-17.             
But, even assuming Warren can rely upon the comments Hayes made           
during the subsequent Somersworth interview to show that she was          
subject to unlawful discrimination when she was denied the                
Durham position, that evidence is still insufficient to carry             
her burden at summary judgment.                                           
A.   Age Discrimination.                                             
In support of her assertion that she was the victim of               
unlawful age discrimination, Warner first points out that the             

two postal employees hired in her stead were younger than she.            
When she applied for those positions, Warner was 58.  The                 
candidate hired for the Durham position - Mr. Minigan - was 36.           
The candidate hired for the Somersworth position - Mr. Adams -            
was 53.                                                                   

Next, Warner points to the first allegedly revealing                 
comment Hayes made during her interview for the Somersworth               
position - that is, when Hayes asked Warner whether she believed          
she “had the energy” to run the Somersworth post office.  From            
Warner’s perspective, that question is powerful evidence that             
Hayes harbored a discriminatory animus against older employees,           

presumably based upon stereotyping.  But see Richter v. Hook-             
SupeRx, Inc., 142 F.3d 1024, 1032 (7th Cir. 1998) (“[Richter]             
points to certain statements made by Simone and Griffith which            
he claims indicate that they impermissibly stereotyped older              
workers.  Specifically, Simone had voiced concerns that Richter           
had a ‘low energy level’ and was ‘resistant to change.’  Richter          
claims that these statements are ‘prime stereotypes about aging           
workers.’  We agree with the district court’s conclusions that            
these statements, standing alone, do not raise an inference of            
age discrimination.”) (emphasis supplied).                                


Hayes, on the other hand, has a different explanation and            
provided some context for the question.  In her deposition,               
Hayes was asked, “Why did you question Ms. Warner’s energy?”              
Hayes responded, in part, by explaining:                                  

That was a valid question for this office, this                      
particular office.  Not every office is created equal.               
The Somersworth post office was a very volatile,                     
hostile office.  Liz had already been dealing with a                 
carrier in her office that was basically like the                    
majority of what we dealt with in Somersworth.                       

Liz, I know what that did to her.  And just because                  
she doesn’t have the energy doesn’t make her not                     
qualified or qualified.  That was a valid question to                
ask.  I wanted her to be aware of what was going on in               
Somersworth.  My entire POOM group was aware of what                 
was the environment in Somersworth at that time.  It                 
wasn’t that I was telling her that you don’t have the                
energy.  It was simply about questioning during the                  
interview; did you realize what this post office is                  
about, do you have the energy based on what she                      
already had going - or had been going through in her                 
own office in Newmarket.                                             

                         * * *                                       

We had spoken about the energy.  I knew Liz was                      
working long hours and hard in Newmarket.  There was                 
no question about that, but going from Newmarket into                
the Somersworth post office was like night and day.  I               
knew she had already told me through a couple of                     
conversations or during conversations that she had                   
been working long hours, and she was there all the                   
time.  And I knew that in my head.  So I just wanted                 
to make sure that we had this conversation.  That it                 
was going to go from almost bad to worse.  I couldn’t                
have put her in there.  It would have been a                         
disservice knowing that if I did not have that                       
conversation with her.                                               


Hayes Deposition (document no. 52-3) at 25, 30.  In her                   
affidavit, Hayes added the following:                                     

I have a recollection of making a comment about                      
needing a lot of energy to keep things in shape when                 
speaking about the Somersworth position.  My concern                 
was that Liz was not keeping up with the daily tasks                 
even in a small post office.  Being a working                        
postmaster requires a lot of time and effort.  There                 
is no one to help you and it is very easy to fall                    
behind.  Liz had difficulty juggling getting the mail                
delivered, keeping up with administrative duties and                 
conducting her EEO investigations.  The environment in               
Somersworth was even more demanding.  It is much                     
larger office and needed supervision from opening to                 
closing.  Being a working postmaster requires a lot of               
stamina both physically and mentally.  It would have                 
just been Liz and a supervisor to address the normal                 
daily tasks on top of the constant grievance                         
activities and multiple harassment charges brought on                
by the carriers against management.  I did not feel                  
Liz was the right person based on her demonstrated                   
ability while in Newmarket.                                          


Hayes Affidavit (document no. 49-1) at para. 29.                          

Finally, in support of her age discrimination claims Warner          
points out that she had generally favorable annual performance            
reviews and says she had more experience than the candidate               
hired for the Durham position and at least comparable experience          
to the candidate hired for the Somersworth position.  But, of             
course “experience” and “competence” are not synonymous.  And,            
this court’s role is not to determine whether the USPS’s hiring           
decisions were unwise, or unfair, or even arbitrary; it is to             
determine whether there is sufficient evidence of unlawful                

discrimination to permit Warner’s claims to go to a jury.  See            
generally Petitti v. New England Tel. & Tel. Co., 909 F.2d 28,            
31 (1st Cir. 1990) (“On appeal our role is not to second-guess            
the business decisions of an employer, nor to impose our                  
subjective judgments of which person would best fulfill the               
responsibilities of a certain job.”).                                     

From Hayes’s perspective, Minigan and Adams gave her more            
reasons to have confidence that they were best suited to the              
positions for which they were hired.  As a regional supervisor,           
Hayes was familiar with the work of all three applicants.  While          
Hayes acknowledged that Warner worked hard and put in long                

hours, she seems to have considered Warner’s overall performance          
to have been merely “fine” or “adequate,” with ample room for             
improvement.  For example, Hayes testified that during her daily          
telephone conferences with offices that managed city delivery:            

Warner was rarely ready to report out with a full                    
explanation of the previous day’s events and what                    
caused the overages.  Warner could rarely speak to the               
high amount of office hours used each day.  Warner was               
not familiar with how to calculate the office hours                  
and what action was necessary to address the office                  
hours.  When I instructed Warner to perform an office                
count of particularly poor performing carriers she did               
not always follow through.  When she did follow                      
through, she was not familiar with how to correct the                
carrier deficiencies and did not document per the M38                
(Managers City Delivery Handbook) and M41 (City                      
Carrier’s Handbook).  I spent many hours reviewing the               
city delivery office time with Warner, even assigning                
tasks for certain individuals that she supervised in                 
order to get the numbers down for those who needed the               
most help, yet she did not develop her city delivery                 
skills.                                                              


Hayes Affidavit at paras. 9-10.  See also Warner’s Annual                 
Performance Reviews (documents no. 52-14, 52-15, and 52-6).2              

The vacant postmaster positions in Durham and Somersworth            
were filled in slightly different ways, so it is, perhaps, worth          
discussing them in some detail.  Candidates for the Durham                
position were subject to a preliminary screening process before           
their applications were provided to Hayes.  Ten people applied            
for the position and an “applicant review team” scored each of            
them.  Hayes then interviewed the five candidates who had                 
received the highest scores.  Warner was in that group of five,           
as was the candidate whom Hayes eventually hired, Mr. Minigan             
(who, perhaps not coincidentally, had received the highest score          
from the applicant review team).  Hayes explained her decision            
to hire Minigan rather than Warner as follows:                            


2    The record does not contain the annual performance reviews           
of the candidates who were offered the postmaster positions for           
which Warner had applied, so there is no basis for comparison.            
Of all of the criteria needed to make my decision for                
the Durham and Somersworth postmaster jobs,                          
productivity in City Delivery was one of the most                    
significant factors.  While Warner met the basic                     
criteria to perform a postmaster’s duties, Minigan and               
Adams [the candidate who transferred from Maine to the               
Durham post office] had more City Delivery experience.               

Warner seemed to disregard her lack of skills as being               
an important factor in upward mobility to a higher-                  
level office.  I say this because Newmarket was always               
the worst performing office in my POOM group and                     
remained that way while Warner was assigned to the                   
office.  I went so far as to develop my own team of                  
Postmasters to perform yearly 3999’s (walks with                     
carriers) and Warner was part of the team, yet she did               
not make any improvements in her own office.  Rather I               
heard multiple excuses as to why the carrier should be               
given a break because of various personal reasons.                   

John Minigan (“Minigan”) was the postmaster in                       
Deerfield, NH, a level 18 at the time he applied for                 
the Durham Postmaster position.                                      

I had awarded Minigan the position in Deerfield based                
on his extensive knowledge of City Delivery, as well                 
as my impression of the quality of his work.                         

Minigan had worked on many special teams as a Team                   
Leader for City Delivery Inspections as well as                      
instructed many trainings for City Delivery.  As a                   
matter of fact, often I would request that Minigan                   
fill in for me on our daily telecoms and run them in                 
my absence.                                                          

Minigan showed consistent and solid management in the                
Deerfield post office.  He was considered one of the                 
leaders in City Delivery.  For these reasons, I felt                 
that Minigan was the best candidate for the Durham                   
postmaster position.                                                 


Hayes Affidavit at paras. 11-16.                                          
Finding a candidate to fill the vacant Somersworth                   
postmaster position did not involve an “applicant review team”            
(seemingly because it involved only a few candidates, one of              

whom was seeking a lateral transfer from another postmaster               
position).  Although it is not entirely clear, it appears that            
applications for the vacant Somersworth position were provided            
directly to Hayes.  As for her hiring decision with regard to             
that position, Hayes explained:                                           

In August, 2018, Warner interviewed for the                          
Somersworth Postmaster position, along with John                     
Riley.  [A third candidate,] David Adams had requested               
a lateral transfer from the South Berwick, Maine                     
Postmaster position.                                                 

Prior to David Adams’ lateral transfer to the                        
Somersworth Postmaster position, he had been the                     
Postmaster in the South Berwick office, a position                   
that I awarded him.  Prior to that, he had been the                  
OIC in Barrington.                                                   

The South Berwick office consisted primarily of city                 
delivery.  Adams made numerous improvements while he                 
was in South Berwick.                                                

Prior to South Berwick, Adams had a supervisory                      
position in the Portsmouth, N.H. office, which was the               
largest office in the group consisting of 20 to 30                   
city routes.  Needless to say, Adams had extensive                   
experience with city delivery.                                       

As for the Somersworth Post Office, I had similar                    
concerns with awarding Warner the postmaster position,               
perhaps even more so because Somersworth Post Office                 
was notoriously a difficult city delivery office to                  
manage.  It was 100% city delivery with no rural                     
delivery, one supervisor and a few clerks.                           
The past managers that oversaw the Somersworth office                
did not manage the carriers for fear of retaliation                  
from the carrier craft.  There was always upheaval,                  
many grievances, chaos and verbal and physical                       
altercations amongst the employees.  It was truly a                  
challenge and was going to require a solid plan to                   
upright the office.  Somersworth was also a Level 20                 
office consisting of 10 to 15 city routes (not exactly               
sure).                                                               

Adams came to the interview with a specific plan to                  
reduce overtime, street time and improve the Office                  
Time.  Adams had visited the Somersworth Post Office                 
and made several recommendations to change the flow of               
the Retail Lobby and arrange the carrier cases to                    
improve the congestion on the workroom floor.  Adams                 
also had extensive knowledge in the grievance process                
which was a factor at the Somersworth Post Office                    
given the grievance history.  Adams was prepared for                 
the interview as he brought the performance reports as               
well as the retail revenue reports to support his                    
recommendations.  Adams had a vision and a plan of                   
action, and based on that, plus his experience, and                  
his performance during the interview, I believed Adams               
was the best candidate for the Somersworth Postmaster                
position and recommended that he be offered the job                  
because of that.                                                     

Not only did Adams put the time and effort into                      
creating a plan to upright the Somersworth post                      
office, he also had personal reasons for wanting the                 
lateral move.  His granddaughter had recently been                   
diagnosed with a medical condition so he wanted to be                
closer to his family reducing his commute and making                 
him more available for them while still being able to                
do his job.                                                          

When I interviewed Warner for the Somersworth                        
position, she did not provide anything that lead me to               
believe she put the time and/or effort into                          
researching anything about the Somersworth Post                      
Office.  She didn’t even visit the office.  When I                   
asked her why she didn’t visit the office, she replied               
because she lived in Somersworth.  Warner did not have               
a plan to do anything to improve any area of the                     
office.  Her answers were vague and carried no weight                
in my opinion.                                                       
Hayes Affidavit at paras. 18-26.  For her part, Warner disputes           
Hayes’s assertion that she “didn’t visit the [Somersworth]                
office,” or that she lacked a plan to improve that office                 
(though it is unclear how or even whether Warner actually                 
communicated that plan to Hayes during the interview; she                 
concedes that she did not submit anything in writing to Hayes.            
See Warner Deposition (document no. 52-5) at 9).                          

Based upon this record, and even construing any ambiguities          

in favor of Warner, there is insufficient evidence of age                 
discrimination to permit a properly instructed jury to conclude           
that Warner was the victim of unlawful discrimination, in                 
violation of the ADEA.  In short, the only suggestion that age            
played any role in Hayes’s hiring decision is the fact that the           
candidates hired were younger than Warner; at the time, Warner            
was 58, the Durham candidate was 36, and the Somersworth                  
candidate was 53.  Additionally, Warner relies upon Hayes’s               
question (made during her interview for the Somersworth                   
position) about whether Warner “had the energy” to succeed in             
the position.  But, that evidence is, at best, particularly weak          

support for an age discrimination claim.  First, Hayes fully and          
plausibly explained the basis for that question.  Second, Hayes           
hired a person in the protected class for that position - that            
is, someone over the age of 40.  See, e.g., Richter, 142 F.3d at          
1032 (“In support of the conclusion that the evidence here does           
not lead to an inference of age discrimination, we note a few             

additional significant facts.  Revco’s decision-makers were               
themselves 46, 53, and 60 years old at the time of the decision.          
While not dispositive, this Court has found it significant that           
individuals alleged to have discriminated on the basis of age             
were themselves members of the protected class.”); Roussin v.             
Covidien LP, No. 13-12539-FDS, 2016 WL 393182, at *15 (D. Mass.           
Feb. 1, 2016) (“In addition, although not dispositive, any                
inference of age discrimination is further weakened by the fact           
that . . . the managers who made the firing decision were                 
themselves members of the same protected class.”); Mathews v.             
Huntington, 499 F. Supp. 2d 258, 267 (E.D.N.Y. 2007) (same)               
(collecting cases).                                                       


And, finally, even if a trier-of-fact were to completely             
discredit Hayes’s explanation for the question, it would be an            
unsustainable leap to conclude that Hayes’s inquiry evidenced a           
bias against older employees.  Viewed in its totality, the                
evidence upon which Warner relies for her age discrimination              
claims is insufficient to survive summary judgment; she has               
shown neither pretext nor discriminatory animus.  Consequently,           
as to count one of Warner’s complaint, the government is                  
entitled to judgment as a matter of law.                                  


B.   Sex Discrimination.                                             
In support of her claim that she was the victim of unlawful          
gender-based discrimination, Warner points to the second comment          
Hayes made during the Somersworth interview - that is, Hayes’s            
observation that the employees at the Somersworth post office             
had never had a female supervisor before, followed by her                 
statement “I wonder how that would work.”  See Hayes Deposition           
(document no. 48-1) at 78.  Warner believes that comment is               
undeniable and persuasive evidence that Hayes favored a man in            
that position, rather than a woman.  Hayes denies any such thing          
and, when questioned about that comment at her deposition, she            
responded as follows:                                                     


Q.   Why did you make that statement?                                
A.   Because they never had a female postmaster or a                 
     manager in there.                                               
Q.   How do you think they would react?                              
A.   That was my question. I wondered how they would                 
     react.                                                          
Q.   And what were your thoughts about how they would                
     react?                                                          
A.   I didn’t have any thoughts.  It was a question                  
     that I did not have any thoughts on.                            
Q.   Did you have a hunch about how they would react?                
A.   No.                                                             
Q.   Did you make the statement because you believed                 
     the Somersworth, New Hampshire, employees would                 
     be more insubordinate towards a woman supervisor?               
A.   No.                                                             
Q.   And while you were interviewing the male                        
     applicants for the Somersworth post office, did                 
     you wonder how they would react to a male                       
     supervisor supervising them?                                    
A.   No.                                                             
Q.   And why didn’t you wonder about that?                           
A.   Because they had always had males supervising                   
     there.                                                          


Hayes Deposition (document no. 48-1) at 78-79.  In her                    
affidavit, Hayes discussed in a bit more detail what motivated            
that comment.                                                             

I do recall having a conversation with Warner about                  
the difficult employees at the Somersworth Post                      
Office.  We agreed that it had been like that for many               
years.  It occurred to me at that very second all the                
managers that had worked at the Somersworth Post                     
office had consisted of entirely men.  Not one woman                 
to my knowledge had managed the office.  Having worked               
with Warner for many years I had an out loud thought                 
and said, “I wonder what it would look like if a woman               
managed the office?” It was in no reference to any one               
woman in particular - just stating a fact.  In my head               
I was complimenting women leaders.                                   

Each post office has its own story, its own set of                   
issues and its own cast of characters that makes it                  
unique. I am the POOM for many post offices. I was                   
just stating a fact, and trying to put a picture                     
together of the employees within that post office.                   


Hayes Affidavit at paras. 27-28.                                          

As additional support for her gender-based discrimination            
claim Warner relies upon a statement made by Hayes long after             
Warner was passed over for the Durham and Somersworth positions           
in 2018.  Specifically, Warner alleges that on January 4, 2020,           
at an annual meeting of postmasters, Hayes referred to a group            
of five men at the meeting as “smoking” - as Warner sees it, an           

unequivocal reference to their attractive physical appearance.            
That, says Warner, is further evidence of Ms. Hayes’s bias                
against women.                                                            

Hayes has a different take on that statement and                     
categorically denies referring to the men as “smoking” - at               
least as that term might refer to their physical appearance.              
Hayes Deposition (document no. 52-3) at 4.  Hayes explained that          
the theme of that meeting was “being on fire” and described it            
as follows:                                                               

The group meeting was all about our performance in                   
POOM [Post Office Operating Manager] Group 4.  We were               
doing very well in our group where POOM 4 was, I would               
say, usually at the bottom of the POOM groups in                     
performance.  So I created a whole PowerPoint slide.                 
And I had a lot of information, and it was a                         
celebration.  I even had fire.  The theme of the                     
meeting was basically about fire, how our group was on               
fire and where there’s smoke, there’s fire, and people               
are, you know, doing wonderful here and there.                       

So, during the conversation I had recognized a lot of                
people.  I had given out some service pins and things                
like that.  I also wanted to recognize that we had                   
several individuals in the audience that had done a                  
tremendous job in their post office.                                 

These five men or young men were sitting next to each                
other, and I said I would like to identify and                       
recognize these people.  So they stood up and                        
everybody clapped.  I said these guys - and I went on                
to talk about how well they were doing.  They were                   
OICs [Officers in Charge] in their offices.  They were               
working hard.  They were making differences and I said               
they were smoking in the offices.  That was the                      
context of it all.  And everybody left and clapped.                  
They sat down, and that was the end of it.                           


Deposition of Kathleen Hayes (document no. 52-3) at 5-6.                  

Hayes’s account is supported by the testimony of Paul                
Ansaldi, a 38-year veteran of the Post Office and former                  
colleague of both Warner and Hayes.  Ansaldi attended the                 
meeting and described it (and Hayes’s comments) as follows:               

I attended the January 14, 2020 Postmaster.  First,                  
there was a theme to the meeting.  POOM group (4)                    
which had performed poorly for several years (prior to               
Kathy Hayes getting the job) was on fire.  Ms. Hayes                 
wanted to celebrate the success of the entire group,                 
not individuals.  The successes that were celebrated                 
were: accidents were down, productivity was up, budget               
hours were being saved, employee availability was up,                
and overtime hours were down as well.  Secondly, Ms.                 
Hayes said: “these men are smoking IN THEIR OFFICES.”                
The individuals (I believe two were females) at my                   
table were not taken back by it.  There were not any                 
sighs, gasps, etc.  It was never discussed.  The                     
remark was appropriate for the meeting.                              


Affidavit of Paul Ansaldi (document no. 49-2) at para. 5.  In             
other words, Ansaldi interpreted the statement as Hayes claims            
to have intended it: an acknowledgement that the five men were            
performing at an extremely high level.  See Hayes Deposition at           
11 (“Let me clarify it.  I did not call them ‘smoking OICS.’  I           
said they were smoking in their offices.  Their numbers were              
good.  So on.  The answer is: No, I did not call or refer to              
anyone as ‘smoking OICS.’”).                                              


Hayes’s comment in 2020 does little to support Warner’s sex          
discrimination claim.  Moreover, the fact that the comment was            
temporally remote from, and entirely unrelated to, Hayes’s 2018           
hiring decisions with respect to Warner further weakens any               
plausible inference that Warner was the victim of gender-based            
discrimination.  See, e.g., McMillan v. Massachusetts Soc. for            
Prevention of Cruelty To Animals, 140 F.3d 288, 300–01 (1st Cir.          
1998) (“[E]ven if the remarks are relevant for the pretext                
inquiry, their probativeness is circumscribed if they were made           
in a situation temporally remote from the date of the employment          
decision or if they were not related to the employment decision           

in question.”) (citations omitted).                                       

Finally, Warner points out that during her career with the           
USPS, Hayes promoted approximately 36 people, but only 13 of              
them were women (roughly 35 percent).  See Plaintiff’s                    
Opposition Memorandum (document no. 48) at 9.  But, of course,            
without knowing the total number of applicants for those                  
positions and their gender, such a statistic provides no                  
evidence of gender bias.  Absent additional relevant                      
information, those numbers are no more illuminating or                    
persuasive than, say, the fact that Warner applied for and was            
denied at least 24 promotions during her career at the USPS.              

See Plaintiff’s Opposition Memorandum, at 17.  Without some               
context, unfounded inferences might be drawn from either of               
those factual statements.                                                 

Viewing the totality of the record evidence in the light             
most favorable to Warner, the court is constrained to conclude            
that it is not sufficient to permit a properly instructed jury            
to find that Warner was the victim of unlawful gender-based               
discrimination.  Reaching such a conclusion would require a               
trier-of-fact to engage in unsupported speculation and draw               
unsustainable inferences from the sparse evidence presented.              
Warner has not met her burden to show that there exists a                 

genuine dispute of material fact with respect to either pretext           
or discriminatory animus.  As to count two of Warner’s                    
complaint, then, the government is entitled to judgment as a              
matter of law.                                                            

                      Conclusion                                     
Counsel for Warner has done a fine job marshaling the                
available evidence and presenting it in a way that most                   
favorably supports Warner’s claims.  But, in the end, this is             
not a close case.  The evidence presented is simply too weak and          
would require a trier-of-fact to draw too many unsupported                
inferences to conclude that Warner was the victim of unlawful             

discrimination.  This is all the more true because Hayes is a             
woman and roughly the same age as Warner which, although plainly          
not dispositive, does further weaken the tenuous inferences of            
unlawful gender and age discrimination upon which Warner relies.          

As noted above, this court’s role is not to determine                
whether the USPS’s hiring decisions were wise or fair, or                 
whether the USPS hired the “best” or most qualified candidate             
for the vacant positions.  The court must determine solely                
whether Warner has met her burden to show the existence of a              
triable question of fact related to pretext or discrimination.            
She has not.  For the foregoing reasons, as well as those set             

forth in the government’s legal memorandum (document no. 33-1)            
and supporting materials, the government’s motion for summary             
judgment (document no. 33) is granted.  In the exercise of the            
court’s discretion, and for the reasons set forth in the                  
government’s legal memoranda, the government’s motion to                  
supplement the declarations of Kathleen Hayes and Paul Ansaldi            
(document no. 49) is granted.  All other pending motions are              
denied as moot.                                                           
 The  Clerk  of  Court  shall  enter  judgment  in  accordance  with 
this  order  and  close  the  case. 

 SO  ORDERED. 

                                                           _—— 
                                      teven   @.  McAuliffe 
                                     United  States  District  Judge 
March  26,  2024 
ec:   Counsel  of  Record 

                                 35