UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                                              
WESTERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK                                              

XEROX CORPORATION,                                                        
                            Petitioner,                                 
                                           Case No. 22-CV-6219-FPG      
v.                                           DECISION AND ORDER           


LOCAL 14A, ROCHESTER REGIONAL JOINT BOARD,                                
XEROGRAPHIC DIVISION WORKERS UNITED,                                      

                            Respondent.                                 


                        INTRODUCTION                                    
   Petitioner Xerox Corporation petitions this Court to stay arbitration and moves for a 
declaratory judgment pursuant to Section 301 of the Labor Management Relations Act (“LMRA”), 
29 U.S.C. § 185(a)(c), alleging that Respondent Local 14A, Rochester Regional Joint Board, 
Xenographic Division Workers United impermissibly demanded arbitration of Respondent’s claim 
that Petitioner discontinued union members’ retirement benefits.  See generally ECF Nos. 1-4.  On 
June 27, 2022, Respondent answered, moved to dismiss Petitioner’s petition, and cross-moved to 
compel arbitration and for injunctive relief.  ECF Nos. 16-19.  On July 21, 2022, Petitioner 
responded to Respondent’s motions.  ECF Nos. 24, 25.  On July 28, 2022, Respondent replied.  
ECF No. 26.  On August 28, Petitioner filed a sur-reply.  ECF No. 29.     
   For the reasons set forth below, Petitioner’s petition to stay arbitration proceedings and 
motion for declaratory judgment are GRANTED.  Respondent’s motions to dismiss, to compel 
arbitration, and for injunctive relief are DENIED.                        
                        BACKGROUND                                      

   Respondent is a labor union that represents employees of Petitioner.  See ECF No. 1.  On 
June 11, 2018, Petitioner and Respondent executed a collective bargaining agreement (“CBA”) 
that governed, inter alia, whether Petitioner may modify retiree health benefits.  Id. at 2.  It is 
undisputed that the CBA expired on November 30, 2021.  Id.  The parties did not extend the 
agreement, nor did the parties execute a successor agreement after the CBA expired.  Id.  
   On December 30, 2021, Petitioner notified Respondent that it intended to discontinue 
health benefits to former employees that had retired before the CBA expired.  Id.  On January 7, 
2022, pursuant to a Grievance Procedure outlined in Article XI of the CBA, Respondent filed a 
grievance at Step 3 of the procedure, alleging that Petitioner’s intended action would “modify 
and/or terminate benefits which had accrued and/or vested under the agreement, causing numerous 
violations of the CBA, including but not limited to violations of Article VIII and any other 
applicable provisions.”  Id. at 2-3 (emphasis added).  The Grievance Procedure provides that if a 
grievance is not satisfactorily settled at Step 3, the grievance may be “appealed to arbitration by 

either party upon written notice to the other party within sixty (60) working days from the date the 
Step 3 answer was delivered to an acknowledged in writing by the Business Agent.”  Id.  According 
to Petitioner, the Grievance Procedure, was provided for current employees, not individuals that 
had retired before the CBA expired.  Id at 3.  According to Respondent, the arbitration provision 
survived the CBA’s expiration because the benefits had vested for life.  Id.  
   On  February  25,  2022,  Petitioner  rejected  Respondent’s  grievance  at  Step  3  of  the 
procedure.  Id.  Petitioner claimed that Respondent’s “grievance is without merit because neither 
the main body of the [CBA] nor the plan documents incorporated in it by reference contain clear 
and  unambiguous  language  sufficient  to  vest  benefits  for  life  under  well-established  legal 
precedent[.]”  Id.  Petitioner claimed the CBA and incorporated plan documents did not vest a 
retiree with health benefits for life, citing various provisions of the CBA for support.1  Id.  The 
incorporated plan documents that govern each applicable retiree health benefit plan provided to 
retirees under the expired CBA are the: (1) Xerox Medical Care Plan for Retired Employees (“Old 

Plan”); (2) Xerox Retiree Health Care Plan (“New Plan”); and (3) Xerox Corporation Retiree 
Health Reimbursement Plan (“HRA Plan”).  Id. at 4.  Petitioner contends that the terms within 
each plan’s documents reserve to Petitioner a right to amend, suspend or terminate the benefits 
provided by each plan because the CBA provides that Xerox “specifically reserves the right to 
amend, suspend or terminate the Plan described herein at any time and for any reason.”  Id. at 4.  
In short, Petitioner alleges that no provision or plan document conferred or vested retiree benefits 
after expiration of the CBA.  Id.                                         
   On March 2, 2022, Respondent demanded arbitration of the grievance after its rejection at 
Step 3 of the Grievance Procedure.  Id.  Respondent contended that health benefits for retirees had 
vested  beyond  the  expiration  of  the  CBA.    Id.    On  March  20,  2022,  Petitioner  rejected 

Respondent’s request for arbitration, stating that “the company declines to arbitrate the grievance 
[because] […] the collective bargaining agreement expired on November 30, 2021.  Accordingly, 
there is no arbitration provision currently in effect.”  Id.              
   On April 14, 2022, Respondent notified Petitioner of its intent to arbitrate the grievance 
and further requested that Petitioner submit the grievance to arbitration.  Id. at 5.  To date, 
Petitioner has not participated in Respondent’s requested arbitration.  Id.  



1 For example, Article VIII(N)(1) of the CBA provides “Eligibility for retirement and provision of benefits for retirees 
are set forth in Schedule H.,” and Schedule H as referenced in Article VIII(N)(1), provides that “This Schedule is 
intended as an outline only and the benefits described are subject to the detailed terms and conditions of the actual 
plans or contracts, as well as to the provisions of applicable state and federal laws.”  Id.  
                      LEGAL STANDARD                                    

   Section 301 of the Labor Management Relations Act (“LMRA”) grants federal courts 
jurisdiction over disputes between employers and labor unions that require interpretation of 
collective bargaining agreements.  29 U.S.C. § 185.  With respect to whether a collective 
bargaining agreement creates a duty for the parties to arbitrate a particular grievance, “[u]nless the 
parties clearly and unmistakably provide otherwise, the question of [arbitrability] is to be decided 
by the court […],” not an arbitrator.  AT & T Techs., Inc. v. Commc’ns Workers of Am., 475 U.S. 
643, 649 (1986) (holding that arbitrability is a judicial determination); see also Constr. Indus. 
Emp’s Ass’n v. Local Union No. 210, Laborers Intern. Union of N. Am., AFL-CIO, 580 F.3d 89, 
94 (2d Cir. 2009) (same).                                                 
   Generally, a party’s “[c]ontractual obligations will cease […] upon termination of [a] 
bargaining agreement.”  Litton Fin. Printing Div., Litton Bus. Sys., Inc. v. NLRB, 501 U.S. 190, 
207  (1991).    Collective  bargaining  agreements,  including  those  that  establish  arbitration 
procedures, are to be interpreted “according to ordinary principles of contract law[.]”  M & G 

Polymers USA, LLC v. Tackett, 575 U.S. 427, 435 (2015).  “In this endeavor, as with any other 
contract, the parties’ intentions control.”  Stolt-Nielsen S.A. v. AnimalFeeds Int’l Corp., 559 U.S. 
662, 682 (2010).                                                          
   Contractual rights which vested under a collective bargaining agreement will, as a general 
rule, survive termination of the agreement and remain subject to the agreement’s terms.  See Litton, 
501 U.S. at 207.  Indeed, a “collective bargaining agreement [may] provid[e] in explicit terms that 
certain benefits continue after the agreement’s expiration.”  Id.  However, where an agreement is 
silent as to the duration of retiree benefits, a court generally “may not infer that the parties intended 
those benefits to vest for life.”  Id. at 442.   Traditionally, courts “should not construe ambiguous 
writings to create lifetime promises.”  Tackett, 575 U.S. at 441.  “Because vesting of welfare plan 
benefits is not required by law, an employer’s commitment to vest such benefits is not to be 
inferred lightly; the intent to vest must be found in the plan documents and must be stated in clear 
and express language.”  Id.  Still, this rule does not preclude a conclusion that the parties’ intended 

to vest lifetime benefits for retirees.  See id. at 442.                  
                         DISCUSSION                                     

   The Court must determine whether the parties’ dispute over Petitioner’s discontinuation of 
retiree health benefits, which occurred after the expiration of the CBA, is subject to arbitration 
under the expired agreement.  For the reasons explained below, the Court concludes that it is not.  
Accordingly, Petitioner’s petition to stay arbitration proceedings and motion for a declaratory 
judgment is granted and Respondent’s motion to dismiss is denied.         
   In addition, because the Court concludes that the parties’ dispute is not arbitrable, the Court 
need not address Respondent’s cross-motion for injunctive relief.  See ECF No. 17.  Because 
arbitrability of the underlying dispute for which injunctive relief is requested is a predicate for 
such relief, Respondent’s cross-motion for injunctive relief is denied as moot.  See Niagara Hooker 
Employees Union v. Occidental Chem. Corp., 935 F.2d 1370, 1376 (2d Cir. 1991). 
I.   Arbitrability                                                      

   The primary issue is whether Respondent’s challenge to Petitioner’s modification of retiree 
health benefits is arbitrable.  Petitioner contends that the dispute is not because (i) the CBA that 
required arbitration proceedings has expired; (ii) the modification occurred after its expiration; and 
(iii) the arbitration procedure does not govern the dispute because the health benefits in question 
did not vest for life pursuant to the agreement.  Respondent does not dispute contentions (i) and 
(ii), but argues with respect to (iii) that the dispute is arbitrable because the health benefits vested 
for life and, therefore, the arbitration procedure governing disputes over modification of such 
benefits survived the agreement’s expiration.  For the reasons explained below, the Court agrees 
with Petitioner.                                                          
   As discussed, contractual obligations of parties to a collective bargaining agreement, 

including a duty to arbitrate, ordinarily terminate upon a collective bargaining agreement’s 
expiration.  See Litton, 501 U.S. at  206; Williamsbridge Manor Nursing Home v. Local 144 Div. 
of 1199, Nat’l Health & Hum. Servs. Emp’s Union, AFL-CIO, 107 F. Supp. 2d 222, 225 (S.D.N.Y. 
2000) (collecting cases).  An arbitration provision will survive expiration of the agreement in only 
limited circumstances.  See Litton, 501 U.S. at 206.  A post-expiration grievance, as alleged here, 
survives expiration only “where an action taken after expiration infringes a right that accrued or 
vested under the agreement[.]”  Id. at 205-06.  If such a right vested, a grievance based on an 
alleged violation of that right is arbitrable.  Id.                       
   In this case, there is no dispute that (i) the CBA expired on November 30, 2021; (ii) 
Petitioner’s modification of retiree health benefits occurred after expiration of the CBA on 

December 30, 2021; and (iii) Respondent brought its arbitration request after modification on 
January 7, 2022.  See ECF No. 1.  The central issue is whether the CBA vested retiree health 
benefits beyond the expiration of the agreement.  To determine if it did, the Court must apply 
“ordinary principles of contract law” to the CBA and its incorporating plan documents.  Tackett, 
574 U.S. at 441.                                                          
   Petitioner relies in chief upon the following language.  First, the CBA includes a general 
durational clause that provides that the “agreement shall except as herein otherwise stated, … 
continue in force and effect until” the CBA’s expiration.  ECF No. 24 at 17.  Further, Schedule H 
of the CBA, the schedule that governs “Benefits for Retirees and Their Dependents,” states that it 
is “intended as an outline […] subject to the detailed terms and conditions of the actual plans or 
contracts[.]”  Id.  In addition, the incorporating plan documents each include reservation of rights 
language that reserve to Petitioner the right to “amend, suspend or terminate each of the retiree 
health benefit plans “at any time and for any reason.”  Id.  Petitioner contends that such language 

enables Petitioner to modify retiree health benefits where no “clear and express” language vests 
such benefits for life and the agreement and incorporating plan documents are otherwise silent 
with respect to vesting.  See ECF No. 1; Tackett, 575 U.S. at 441         
   Respondent disagrees.  It notes that the Old Plan and New Plan incorporating documents 
provide that retiree health benefits for individuals who retired before the expiration of the CBA 
“shall continue” until “11:59 p.m. on the day of the Retiree’s death.”  ECF No. 18 at 10 (emphasis 
added).  In addition, the same documents provide that “[i]n the event of the death of a Retiree 
while a Participant under the Plan, provided that the Eligible Dependents of such Retiree continue 
to make contributions under Section 3.2(b), the Eligible Dependent spouse of such Retiree shall 
continue as a Participant in the Plan until his or her death.”  Id. at 16 (emphasis added).  Further, 

the incorporating plan documents provide that retiree health benefits will be provided until “the 
close of business on the day the Retiree ceases to be a Retiree.”  ECF No. 18 at 15.  The HRA plan 
documents, further, provide that a benefits allowance provided by a particular program under the 
HRA shall be calculated with consideration of “the retiree’s expected lifetime using accepted 
actuarial assumptions.”  ECF No. 17-2 at 10.  Respondent’s primary contention is that the inclusion 
of these references to retirees’ death and life expectancy are sufficient to vest such benefits for life 
beyond the duration of the CBA.  See generally ECF No. 18.                
   The Court concludes that the language Respondent relies upon does not clearly or expressly 
vest the benefits in question for life.  In addition, absent other language that may reasonably 
support an interpretation that the benefits vested, Petitioner’s right to modify such benefits is 
preserved by the “reservation of rights” language referenced above.       
   First, Respondent’s contention that the above references to benefits in relation to a retiree’s 
“death” is equivalent to tying benefits to a retiree’s lifetime beyond the expiration of a CBA is 

incorrect.  The Second Circuit has made clear that clauses providing benefits to retirees until “a 
retiree’s death or […] the age at which he becomes or could become eligible for Medicare . . . 
cannot reasonably read as binding [an employer] to vest the benefits at issue.”  Joyce v. Curtiss-
Wright Corp., 171 F.3d 130, 134 (2d Cir. 1999).  This is, in part, because a reference to a retiree’s 
death is susceptible to the “reasonable explanation” that a retiree’s death “obviates the need for 
[such benefits]” during the term of the controlling agreement.  Id. at 135.  In Joyce, the Second 
Circuit held that such a reference to the “death” of a retiree is insufficient to overcome the Supreme 
Court’s admonition that an employer’s commitment to vest “is not to be inferred lightly” and that 
it must be found in “express language [in the] plan documents.”  Id. at 135; Tackett, 575 U.S. at 
441.  Indeed, other courts have likewise concluded, and the Second Circuit has affirmed, that “until 

death” language is “not the functional equivalent of lifetime language” which is “stronger and 
more explicit” with respect to vesting and means “for life.”  Kelly v. Honeywell Int’l, Inc. 233 
F.Supp.3d 302, 314 (D. Conn. 2017), aff’d, 933 F.3d 173 (2d Cir. 2019), citing Grove v. Johnson 
Controls, Inc., 176 F.Supp.3d 455 (M.D. Pa. 2016), then citing Bland v. Fiatallis N.A., Inc., 401 
F.3d 779, 786 (7th Cir. 2005).  The Court accordingly cannot conclude that the CBA and 
incorporating plan documents’ references to a retiree’s “death” compel the inference that the 
retiree health benefits in question vested for life.                      
   Second, with respect to Respondent’s contention that the use of a retiree’s actuarily 
calculated life expectancy unambiguously vests the above referenced benefit program under the 
HRA plan for life, the Court similarly finds this aspect of the relevant HRA plan insufficient to 
vest such a benefit.  No case in the Second Circuit has directly addressed such a claim, but the 
Court concludes that HRA plan documents do not show an intent to vest such a benefit.  Indeed, 
as the plan documents show, the above referenced life expectancy language is but one of several 
factors used to calculate a retiree’s benefit allowance under the HRA plan.2  Accordingly, absent 

“express” language providing that the benefit allowance vested for life, the Court finds that the 
multi-factor calculation method the HRA plan provides, when viewed within the totality of the 
plan, is not “capable of reasonably being interpreted” to vest such benefits for life.  Am Fed’n of 
Grain Millers, AFL-CIO v. Int’l Multifoods Corp., 116 F.3d 976, 980 (2d Cir. 1997).    
   Moreover, in the absence of “clear and express” language in favor of vesting, the Court 
additionally finds persuasive the CBA’s inclusion of “reservation of rights” language in reaching 
its conclusion that the present dispute is not arbitrable.  Several courts provide persuasive authority 
for the conclusion that, absent other language to the contrary, a CBA’s reservation of rights 
language will preclude a claim that retiree health benefits may have vested before the expiration 

of the agreement in question.  See, e.g., Cooper v. Honeywell Int’l, 884 F.3d 612, 621 (6th Cir. 
2018) (concluding that “[t]he retiree medical plan itself provides a final indication that the CBA 
did not intend to vest retiree healthcare benefits” where the “plan also contain[ed] a reservation-
of-rights clause”); Beale v. Kraft Heinz Foods Co., No. 16-cv-1119, 2018 WL 2085277, at *7 (S.D. 


2 The program provides in pertinent part that:                            

   The pre-65 Benefits Allowance will be the total of three components:  The Basic Allowance based 
   on the premium of the most efficient HMO’s, this amount will be capped at two times the 1995 
   amount; the Service Component, an amount equal to $20 times total years of service with the 
   Company up to a maximum of 30 years; and the LifeCycle Assistance Component based on the 
   employee’s forfeited balance in the LifeCycle Assistance Program spread over the retiree’s expected 
   lifetime using accepted actuarial assumptions.                       

ECF No. 17-2 at 10.                                                       
Iowa Mar. 27, 2018) (“[A]n unambiguous reservation-of-rights provision is sufficient without 
more to defeat a claim that retirement welfare plan benefits vested.”); Grove v. Johnson Controls, 
Inc., 176 F. Supp. 3d 455, 479-80 (M.D. Pa. 2016) (“In conclusion, the reservation of rights 
language . . . is clear and unambiguous, and forecloses any notion of vesting.”); Blankenship v. 

Dominion Energy Transmission, No. 2:18-cv-01208, 2019 WL 13198125, at *13 (W.D. Pa. Oct. 
2, 2019) (finding reservation of rights provision “clearly and unequivocally defeats a claim that 
the policy contains the express language needed to effectuate a vesting of benefits”). 
   For these reasons, the Court concludes that the retiree health benefits did not vest pursuant 
to the CBA and, thus, Petitioner’s modification of those benefits after the expiration of the CBA 
is not subject to the CBA’s arbitration provision.                        
II.  Declaratory Judgment                                               

   To determine whether declaratory judgment is proper, courts look to “(1) whether the 
judgment will serve a useful purpose in clarifying or settling the legal issues involved; and (2) 
whether a judgment would finalize the controversy and offer relief from uncertainty.”  Duane 
Read, Inc. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 411 F.3d 384, 389 (2d Cir. 2005).  Here, the Court 
finds a declaratory judgment will clarify the issue of whether the retiree health benefits at issue 
vested for life and, as a corollary, whether a dispute regarding a modification of such benefits is 
arbitrable.                                                               
   The Court accordingly concludes that (1) the CBA between the parties effective June 11, 
2018 through November 30, 2021 did not vest lifetime retiree health benefits past the duration of 
the  CBA;  (2)  there  is  no  existing  agreement  to  arbitrate  the  issues  or  claims  set  forth  in 
Respondent’s arbitration request; and (3) Respondent’s January 7, 2022 Grievance is not arbitrable 
under the now-expired CBA.                                                
                              CONCLUSION 
    For the reasons set forth above, Petitioner’s motion to stay arbitration proceedings and for 
a declaratory judgment (ECF Nos.  1, 2) is GRANTED.  Respondent’s motions to dismiss, to 
compel arbitration and for injunctive relief (ECF Nos. 16, 17) are DENIED.  The Clerk of Court 
is directed to enter judgment and close this case. 

    IT IS SO ORDERED. 
Dated: December 20, 2022 
    Rochester, New York 

                                            / FRANK P.      GERACTI, JR. 
                                        United States District’Court Judge 
                                        Western District of New York 

                                    1]